N Helleſpont guilty of true Loues blood,
In view and oppoſit two Cities ſtood,
Seaborders,diſioyn'd by Neptunes might;
The one Abydos, th'other Seſtos hight.
At Seſtos Hero dwelt, Hero the faire,
Whom young Apollo courted for her haire,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outſide of her garments were of Lawne,
The lining, purple ſilke,with guilt ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene, and bordred with a groue,
Where Venus in her naked glory ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eyes
Of proud Adonis, that before her lies :
Her kirtle blue, whereon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the blood of wretched louers ſlaine.

Vpon her head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the groud beneath.
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leaues,
Whoſe workmanſhip both man and beaſt deceiues.
Many would praiſe the ſweet ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When't was the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for hony, Bees haue lought in vaine,
And beat from thence, haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her necke,like Diamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloues, for neither Sunne nor wind
Would burne or parch her hands, but to her mind,
Or warme or coole them : for they tooke delite
To play vpon thoſe hands,they were ſo white;
Buskins of ſhels all ſiluered, vſed ſhee,
And brancht with bluſhing Corall to the knee,
Where Sparrowes pearch t,of hollow pearle & gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold :
Thoſe with ſweet water oft her hand maid fils,
Which as ſhe went,would cherup through the bils,
Some ſay, for her the faireſt Cupid pin'd;
And looking in her face,was ſtrucken blind.
But this is true, ſo like was one the other,
As he imagin'd Hero was his mother :
And oftentimes into her boſome flew,
About her naked necke his bare armes threw,
And laid his childiſh head vpon her breſt

And with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As Nature wept,thinking ſhe was vndone,
Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her then ſhe left
And of ſuch wondrous beauty her bereft
Therefore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffred wracke,
Since Heroes time, hath halfe the world been blacke.
Amorous Leander, beautifull and young,
( Whoſe Tragedie diuine Muſaus ſung )
Dwelt at Abydus,ſince him dwelt there none,
For whom, ſucceeding times may greater mone.
His dandling treſſes that were neuer ſhorne,
Had they been cut,and vnto Colchos borne,
Would haue allur'd the ventrous youth of Greece,
To hazzard more then for the golden fleece.
Faire Cynthia wiſht his armes might be her ſphere :
Griefe makes her pale, becauſe ſhe moues not there.
His body was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his hand :
Euen as delicious meat is to the taſte,
So was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops fhoulder: I could tell yee,
How ſmooth his breſt was,and how white his belly,
And whoſe immortall fingers did imprint
That heauenly path, with many a curious dint,
That runs along his backe ; but my rude pen
Can hardly blazon forth the loues of men.

Much leſſe of powerfull gods, let it ſuffice,
That my ſlacke Muſe muſt ſing of Leanders eyes.
Theſe orient cheekes and lips,exceed'ing his
Tha leapt in water for a kiſie
Of hadow,and deſpiſing many,
I e could enioy the loue of any.
Had wde Hi politus Leander ſeene,
Enamored of his beauty had he beene,
His preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh country dwelt,
The barb'rous Thracian ſouldier mou'd with nought,
Was mou'd with him,and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore hee was a mayd in mans attire,
For in his lookes were all that men'deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke, a ſpeaking eye,
A brow for Loue to banquet royally,
And ſuch as knew he was a man, would ſay,
Leander, thou art made for amorous play,
Why art thou not in Loue, and lou'd of all ?
Though thou be faire,yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of wealthy Seſtos euery yeere,
For his ſake whom their Goddeſſe held ſo deare,
Roſe-cheekt Adonis kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandred gheſt,
To meet their loues,ſuch as had none at all,
Came Louers home from this great feſtiuall.
For euery ſtreet like to a Firmament,

Gliſtred with breathing ſtars,who, where they went
Frighted the Melancholy earth, which deem'd,
Eternall heauen to burne, for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the ſunnes rich Chariot.
But farre aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchanted gazers mind :
For like Sea-nymphs inueigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the ſtanders by
Nor that night-wandring pale and watry ſtarre,
(When yawning Dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the gloomy skie,
Where crown'd with blazing light and Maieſtie
She proudly ſits,) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than ſhe the hearts of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as,when gawdy Nymphes purſue the chaſe,
Wretched I wions ſhaggy-footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heate,gallop amaine,
From ſteepe Pine-bearing mountaines to the Plaine:
So ranne the people forth to gaze vpon her
And all that view'd her, were enamour'd on her.
And as in furie of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine, or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtroo¬
So at her preſence all ſurprizde and tooken,(ken,
Await the ſentence of her ſcornefull eyes :
He whom ſhe fauours liues, the other dyes.

There might you ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome ( their violent paſſions to aſſwage)
Compile ſharpe Satyres,but alas,too late,
For faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate,
And many ſeeing great Princes were denyed,
Pin'd as they went,and thinking on her, dyed.
On this feaſt day, O curſed day and hower,
Went Hero thorow Seſtos, from her tower
To Venus temple,where vnhappily
As after chanc'd,they did each other ſpy,
So faire a Church as this had Venus none,
The wals vvere of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein vvas Proteus caru'd,and ouer head
A liuely vine of greene ſea agget ſpread,
Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other,wine from grapes out-wrung,
Of Cryſtall ſhining,faire,the pauement was,
The towne of Seſtos, call'd it Venus glaſſe :
There might you ſee the gods in ſundry ſhapes,
Committing headdy ryots,inceſt,rapes,
For know,that vnderneath this radiant flower
Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen tower,
Ioue ſlily ſtealing from his ſiſters bed,
To dally with I dalian Ganimed ;
And for his loue Europa bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rain-bow in a cloud :
Bloud-quaffing Mars heauing theyron net,

Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire, to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Siluanus vyeeping for the louely boy,
That now is turn'd into a Cypres tree,
Vnder whoſe ſhade the Wood-gods loue to be.
And in the midſt a ſiluer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing Turtles blood,
Tayl'd to the ground, vailing her eye-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhe roſe.
Thence flew Loues arrow with the golden head:
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone-ſtill he ſtood, and euermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his count nance blazed,
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was ſtrooke:
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue or hate :
For Will in vs is ouer-rul'd by Fate.
When two are ſtript long ere the courſe begin,
We wiſh that one ſhould loſe, the other winne.
And one eſpecially do we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect;
The reaſon no man knowes : let it ſuffice,
What we behold is cenſur'd by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the loue is ſlight.
Who euer lou'd, that lou'd not at firſt ſight :
He kneel'd,but vnto her deuoutly prayd:
Chaſte Hero, to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſayd ,

Were I the Saint he worſhips, I would heare him:
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words,came ſomewhat neere
(him. He ſtarted vp, ſhe bluſht as one aſham'd,
Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
He toucht her hand; in touching it,ſhe trembled :
Loue deepely grounded, hardly is diſſembled.
Theſe louers parled by the touch of hands.
True loue is mute, and oft amazed ſtands.
Thus while dumb ſigns their yeelding harts entagled
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was ſpangled,
And Night deepe drencht in miſtie Acheron,
Heav'd vp her head, and halfe the world vpon,
Breath'd darkneſſe forth, (darke night is Cupids day.)
And now begins Leander to' diſplay
Loues holy fire,with words,with ſighes,and teares,
Which like ſweet Muſicke entred Hero s 'eares :
And yet at euery word ſhe turn'd aſide,
And alwaies cut him off as he replide.
At laſt, like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With cheerefull hope thus he accoſted her :
Faire creature, let me ſpeake without offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts as thy faire lookes do mine,
Then ſhould ſt thou be his priſoner,who is thine.
Be not vnkind and faire: mis-ſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behauiours boyſterous and ruffe.
Thun me not, but heare me ere you goe,

God knowes I cannot force loue as you do.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending,
From Venus altar to your footſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceed her farre,
To whom you offer, and whoſe Nunne you are.
Why ſhould you worſhip her ? her,you ſurpaſſe
As much,as ſparkling Diamonds, fiaring glaſſe.
A Diamond ſet in Lead, his worth retaines :
A heau'nly Nymph belou'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiues no blemiſh, but oft-times more grace;
Which makes me hope, although I am but baſe;
Baſe in reſpect of thee, diuine and pure
Dutifull ſeruice may thy loue procure :
And I in dutie will excell all other,
As thou in beautie doſt exceed Loues mother.
Nor heau'n, nor thou were made to gaze vpon.
As heau'n preſerues all things, ſo ſaue thou one.
A ſtately builded ſhip, well rigg'd and tall,
The Ocean maketh more maieſticall :
Why vowſt thou then to liue in Seſtos here,
Who on Loues ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeare ?
Like vntun'd golden ſtrings, all women are,
Which long time lie vntouch't, will harſhly iarre.
Veſſels of braſſe oft handled, brightly ſhine.
What difference betwixt the richeſt Mine,

And baſeſt mold, but vſe ? for both, not vs'd,
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abus'd,
When Miſers keepe it; being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes, themſelues and others do adorne,
Neither themſelues nor others if not worne.
Who builds a Palace,and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero, learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh.
Lone women like to empty houſes periſh ;
Leſſe ſins the poore-rich man that ſtarues himſelfe,
In heaping vp a maſſe of droſſie pelfe,
Than ſuch as you; his golden earth remaines,
Which after his deceaſe ſome other gaines.
But this faire Iemme, ſweet in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence, can be bequeath'd to none:
Or if it could,downe from th'enameld skie,
All Heauen would come to claime this legacie;
And with inteſtine broyles the world deſtroy,
And quite confound Natures ſweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that blis ;
One is no number : maids are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſociety of men.
Wilt thou liue ſingle ſtill ? one ſhalt thou be,
Though neuer-ſingling Hymen couple thee.
Wild Sauages, that drinke of running Springs,

Thinke water farre excels all earthly things,
But they that daily taſte neat Wine, deſpiſe it,
Virginitie, albeit ſome highly prize it,
Compar'd with marriage,had you try'd them both,
Differs as much,as Wine and Water doth.
Baſe boullion for the ſtampes ſake we allow,
Euen ſo for mens impreſſion doe we you,
By which alone,our reuerend Fathers ſay,
Women receiue perfection euery way.
This Idol wwhich you tearme Virginitie,
Is neither Eſſence ſubiect to the eye,
No, nor to any one exterior ſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence.
Nor is 't of earth or molde celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.
Of that which hath no being doe not boaſt :
Things that are not at all are neuer loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous:
What vertue is it, that is borne with vs?
Much leſſe can honour be aſcrib'd thereto,
Honour is purchaſ'd by the deeds we doe.
Beſeeue me Hero,honour is not wonne,
Vntill ſome honourable deed bee done.
Seeke you for chaſtitie, immortall fame,
And know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name.
Whoſe name is it, if ſhe be falſe or not,
So ſhe be faire,but ſome vile tongues will blot ?

But you are faire (aye me) ſo wondrous faire,
So young, ſo gentle, and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke, if thus you liue alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then Hero, hate me not, nor from me flie,
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamie :
Perhaps thy ſacred Prieſthood makes thee loath :
Tell me to whom mad'ſt thou that heedleſſe oath ?
To Venus anſwered ſhe: and as ſhe ſpake,
Foorth from thoſe two tralucent ceſternes brake
A ſtreame of liquid Pearle, which downe her face
Made milk- white paths,wheron the gods might trace
To Ioues high Court. He thus replide : The rites
In which Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,
Are banquets, Doricke muſicke ; midnight reuell ,
Playes,Maskes, and all that ſterne age counteth euill,
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thou in vowing chaſtitie,haſt ſworne,
To rob her name and honour,and thereby
Committ'ſt a ſinne farre worſe then periury :
Euen ſacriledge againſt her Deity
Through regular and formall purity.
To expiate which ſinne,kiſſe,and ſhake hands,
Such ſacrifice as this Venus demands.
Thereat ſhe ſmil'd, and did deny him ſo,
As put thereby, yet might he hope for moe,
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his ſpeech,

And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold Virginitie,
The gentle Queene of Loues ſole enemiy,
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nun,
When Venus ſweet rites are perform'd and dun.
Flint-breſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your Miſtris are at ſtrife.
Loue Hero then,and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeeres with auarice.
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt corne dyes, if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is loſt, too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he vſ'd, and many more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded, that was wonne before,
Heroes lookes yeelded, but her words made warre,
Women are won,when they begin to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallow'd Cupids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd, the deeper was ſhe ſtrooke.
Yet euilly faining anger, ſtroue ſhe ſtill,
And would be thought to grant againſt her will:
So hauing pauſ'd a while, at laſt ſhe ſaid,
Who taught thee Rethorike to deceiue a Maid ?
Aye me,ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhor,
And yet I like them for the Orator.

With that Leander ſtoopt to haue imbrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him : Gentle youth, forbeare
To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke, and vnderneath a hill,
Farre from the towne ( where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saue that the Sea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends forth a rattling murmure to the land,
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſit vs.
My turret ſtands,and there God knowes I play
With Venus Swannes,and Sparro wes all the day,
A dwarfiſh beldam beares me company,
That hops about the chamber where I lye ;
And ſpends the night (that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe and apiſh merriment,
Come thither : As ſhe ſpake this, her tongue tript,
For vnawares ( Come thither)from her ſlipt,
And ſodainly her former colour chang'd,
And here and there her eyes through anger rang'd,
And like a Planet mouing ſeuerall wayes,
At one ſelfe inſtant, ſhe poore ſoule aſſayes,
Louing,not to loue at all,and euery part
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her heart,
And hands ſo pure, ſo innocent, nay ſuch
As might haue made heauen ſtoope to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vphold to Venus, and againe,

Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtitie, but all in vaine,
Cupid beats downe her prayers with his wings
Her vowes aboue the empty ayre he flings
All deepe enrag'd,his ſinowie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft,that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtrooken lookt ſo dolefully,
As made Loue ſigh,to ſee his tyrannie.
And as ſhe wept,her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd,
Then towards the Palace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment, and griefe he flies,
And to thoſe ſterne Nymphs,humbly made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other,and be bleſt,
But with a gaſtly,dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouſand deaths at euery glance,
They anſwered Loue,nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word,their hate to him was ſuch :
Hearken a while, and I will tell you why,
Heauens winged Herald, Ioue-borne Mercury,
The ſelfe-ſame day that he aſleepe had laid
Inchanted Argus ſpyed a country Maid,
Whoſe careleſſe haire,in ſtead of pearle t'adorne it,
Gliſtred with dew,as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it,
Her breath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure,and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet proud ſhe was, (for lofty pride that'dwels
In towred Courts, is oft in Shepheards cels.

And too too well the faire Vermilion knew,
And ſiluer tincture of her cheekes,that drew
The loue of euery Swaine : On her this god
Enamoured was,and with his Snaky rod,
Did charme her nimble feet,and made her ſtay,
The while vpon the hillocke downe he lay
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancie to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt ;
And then he woo'd with kiſſes, and at laſt,
As Shepheards doe, her on the ground he laid,
And tumbling in the graſſe,he often ſtraid
Beyond the bounds of ſhame, in being bold
To eye thoſe parts which no eye ſhould behold,
And like an inſolent commanding louer,
Boaſting his parentage,would needs diſcouer
The way to new Eliſium : but ſhe,
Whoſe onely dower was her chaſtitie,
Hauing ſtriu'n in vaine, was now about to cry
And craue the helpe of Shepheards that were nie.
Herewith he ſtayd his furie and began
To giue her leaue to riſe:away ſhe ran,
After vyent Mercury, who vſ'd ſuch cunning,
As ſhe to heare his tale,left off her running.
Maids are not wonne by brutiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſure and delight,
And knowing Hermes courted her, was glad

That ſhe ſuch louelineſſe and beauty had,
As could prouoke his liking, yet vyas mute,
And neither vvould deny, nor grant his ſute.
Still vow'd he loue, ſhe wvanting no excuſe.
To feed him with delayes as wyomen vſe,
Or thirſting after immortalitie,
All women are ambitious naturally,
Impoſ'd vpon her Louer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe, nor yet ſhe aske,
A draught of flowing Nectar ſhe requeſted,
Wherewith the king of gods and men is feaſted.
He ready to accompliſh what ſhe vvild,
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe Ioues cup fild,)
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike Loue,
Which being knowne (as vyhat is hid from loue ?
He inly ſtorm'd,and waxt more furious,
Than for the fire filcht by Prometheus,(here,
And thruſts him downe from heauen,hee wandring
In mournfull tearmes, with ſad and heauy cheere,
Complain'd to Cupid, Cupid for his ſake,
To be reueng'd on Ioue, did vnde, ake,
And thoſe on whom heauen , earth, and hell relies,
I meane the adamantine Deſtinies,
He wounds with loue, and forſt them equally
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercury,
They offered him the deadly fatall knife,
That ſheares the ſlender threds of humane life.

At this faire feathered feet, the engins laid,
Which th'earth from ougly Chaos den vp-waid,
Theſe he regarded not, but did entreat
Ahat Ioue, Vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he crau'd,and once againe,
Saturne and Ops began their golden raigne.
Murder, rape,warre, luſt and treacherie,
Were vvith Ioue cloſ'd in Stygian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got,
He rechleſſe of his promiſe,did deſpiſe
The loue of th'euerlaſting deſtinies.
They ſeeing it; both Loue and him abhor'd,
And Iupiter vnto his place reſtor'd,
And but that learning in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeat of Ioue it ſelfe aduance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhmeat they added this,
That he and pouertie ſhould alwaies kiſſe :
And to this day is euery Scholler poore,
Groſſe gold from them runs headlong to the Boore;
Likewiſe,the angry ſiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelues on Hermes haue concluded,
That Midas brood ſhall ſit in honors chaire,

To Which the Muſes ſonnes are onely heire,
And fruitf ull wits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent runne into regions farre,
And few great Lords in vertuous deeds ſhall ioy,
But be ſurpriz'd with euery gariſh toy,
And ſtill inrich the lofty ſeruile Clowne,
Who with incroching guile, keepes learning downe.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuit no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the Fates were iniured.

Y this ſad Hero with loue vnacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face, fell downe and fainted:
He kiſt her,and breath'd life into her lips,

Herewith as one diſpleaſ'd, away ſhe trips,
Yet as ſhe vyent,full often lookt behind,
many poore excuſes did ſhe find
To linger by the way,and once ſhe ſtayd,
And would haue turn'd againe,but was afrayd,
In offering parly, to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes, and in her idle flight,
er painted fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a Nouice knew not vhat ſhe meant ;
But ſtayd,and after her a Letter ſent :
Which ioyfull Hero anſwered in ſuch ſort,
As he had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall Graces lockt their wealth ;
And therefore to her tower he got by ſtealth.
Wide open ſtood the dore, he need not clime ;
And ſhe her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Had ſpred the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome,
And oft lookt out,and muſ'd hee did not come
At laſt he came : O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedy louers had at their firſt meeting ?
e as kt, ſhe gaue, and nothing was denyed,
Both to each other quickly were affyed.
Looke how their hands, ſo were their hearts vnited ;
And what he did, ſhe willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kiſſes, the imbracements ſweet,
When like deſires and affections meet.

For from the earth to heauen, is Cupid raiſ'd,
Where fancy is in equall ballance paiſ'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhnes ſodainly repented,
And turn'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented ;
As if her name and honour had been wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I,and ſhe wiſht, albeit not from her heart,
That he would leaue her turret and depart.
The mirthfull god of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Ny mph beguil d ;
For hitherto he did but fan the fire,
And kept it downe,that it might mount the higher.
Now waxt ſhe iealous, leſt his loue abated,
Fearing her owne thoughts made her to be hated ;
Therefore vnto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmaſis her body throes
Vpon his boſome, where with yeelding eyes,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger, if he were diſpleaſ'd ;
O what god would not therewith be appeaſ'd ?
Like Aeſops Cocke, this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good will had wonne ;
But know you not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haue a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduance a ſtep,

Mou'd by Loues force,vnto each other leap,
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect,
Albeit Leander rude in loue, and raw,
Long dallving with Hero nothing ſaw,
That might delight him more, yet he ſuſpected,
Some amorous rites or other were neglected :
Therefore vnto his body, hers he clung,
She, fearing on the Ruſhes to be flung (ued,
Striu'd vvith redoubled ſtrength, the more ſhe ſtri¬
The more a gentle pleaſing heat reuiued,
Which taught him all that elder louers know ;
And now the ſame'gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine termes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it,
Loue alwayes makes thoſe eſoquent that haue it :
She, with a kinde of granting, put him by it,
And euer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,
Like to the tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lauiſh, ſau'd her Maiden head :
Ne're Ring more ſought to keepe his Diademe,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gem me.
Aboue our life we loue a ſtedfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of great worth vye ſend,
We often kiſſe it, of ten looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gone:
No maruell then, though Hero vvould not yeeld
So ſoone to part from that ſhe dearely held.

Iewels been loſt are found againe, this neuer,
Tis loſt but once, and once loſt, loſt for euer.
Now had the morne eſpy'd her louers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhe ſtarts, puts on her purple vyeeds,
And red for anger that he ſtayd ſo long,
All headlong throwes her ſelfe the clouds among
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbrac't her ſodainly, tooke leaue, and kiſt.
Long vvas he taking leaue,and loth to goe,
And kiſt againe as Louers vſe to doe :
Sad Hero vvrung him by the hand and vvept,
Saying ; Let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore, ſhe turn'd about,
As loth to ſee Leander going out.
And now the ſunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe Louers,downward creepes.
So that in ſilence of the clowdy night,
Though it was morning,did he take his flight :
But what the ſecret truſty night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonnet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband vyound,
Wherewith ſhe wreath'd her largely ſpreading haire;
Nor could the youth abſtaine, but he muſt weare
The ſacred ring vvherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious chaſtitie ſhe vow'd,
Which made his loue through Seſtos to bee knowne,

And thence vnto Abydus ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſayle, for incorporeall Fame,
Whoſe weight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
Is ſwifter than the wind,whoſe tardy plumes
Are reeking water, and dull earthly fumes.
Home when he came, he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled ayre thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in a forren place,and ſtraight from thence,
Alcides like by mighty violence,
He would haue chac'd away the ſwelling Maine
That him from her vniuſtly did detaine :
Like as the Sunne in a Diameter,
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heateth kindly ſhining lat'rally,
So beauty ſweetly quickens when it's nie ;
But being ſeparated and remoued,
Burnes where it cheriſht,murders where it loued :
Therefore,euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was young Leanders looke ;
O none heue power but gods their loue to hide,
A Fection by the count nance is deſcride,
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd, betrayes poore louers.
His ſecret flame apparantly was ſeene,
Leanders father knew where he had beene,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk'd his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparkles new begunne.

But loue reſiſted once, growes paſſionate,
And nothing more then counſell louers hate :
For, as a hot proud horſe highly diſdaines
To haue his head control'd,but breakes the raines,
Spits forth the ringled bit, and with his houes
Checkes the ſubmiſſiue ground : ſo he that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd,the worſe he fares ;
What is it now, but mad Leander dares ?
O Hero, Hero, thus he cry'd full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft,
Where hauing ſpide her tower, long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'd the narrow toiling Helleſpont
To part in twaine,that he might come and go.
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no ;
With that he ſtript him to the yu'ry skin,
And crying,Loue,I come, leapt liuely in :
Whereat the Saphyr-viſag'd god grew proud,
And made his capring Triton ſound aloud,
Imagining,that Ganimed diſpleaſ'd,
Had left the heauens, therefore on him he ſeaz'd :
Leander ſtriu'd, the waues about him wound,
And puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle, and in low corrall groues,
Sweet ſinging Mermayds ſported with their loues,
On heapes of heauy gold, and tooke great pleaſure,
To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort the ſhipwracke treaſure:
For here the ſtately azure palace ſtood,

Where Ringly Neptune and his traine abode,
The luſty god imbrac't him, call'd him loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to Ioue :
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp,and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple Mace,
Which mounted vp,intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt him.
Leander being vp,began to ſwim,
And looking backe, ſaw Neptune follow him.
Whereat agaſt, the poore ſoule 'gan to cry ;
O let me viſit Hero ere I dye :
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the Sea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He clapt his plumpt cheekes,with his treſſes playd,
And ſmiling wantonly,his loue bewrayd ;
He vvatcht his armes,and as they open'd wide,
At euery ſtroke betwixt them vvould he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe, and then runne out and dance,
And as he turn'd caſt many a luſtfull glance,
And threw him gawdy toyes to pleaſe his eye,
And diue into the water and there prye
Vpon his breſt,his thighes, and euery lim,
And vp againe,and cloſe beſide him ſwim :
And talke of Loue: Leander made reply,
You are deceiu'd, I am no vvoman I.

Thereat ſmil'd Neptune,and then told a tale,
How that a Shepheard ſitting in a vale,
Playd with a boy, ſo faire and kind,
As for his loue, both earth and heauen pin'd,
That of the cooling riuer durſt not drinke,
Leſt water-Nymphs ſhould pul him from the brink ,
And when he ſported in the fragrant lawnes
Gote-footed Satyres, and vpſtarting Fawnes
Would ſteale him thence,ere halfe his tale was done.
Aye me, Leander cry'd,th'enamoured ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſy bower,
Deſcends vpon my radiant Heroes tower.
O that theſe tardy armes of mine were wings :
And as he ſpake, vpon the waues he ſprings ;
Neptune was angry that he gaue no eare,
And in his heart reuenging malice beare :
He flung at him his Mace, but as it went,
He call'd it in, for loue made him repent.
The Mace returning backe,his o wne hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this freſh-bleeding wound Leander view'd,
His colour went and came as if he rewd
The griefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſts,
Relenting thoughts, remorſe and pitty reſts.
And who haue hard hearts,and obdurate minds,
But vicious,hare-brain'd,and illitt'rat Hinds :
The god ſeeing him vvith pitty to be moued

Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith, too credulous,
With folly and falſe hope deluding vs.
Wherefore Leanders fancie to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſdome to giue much, a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſwading oratorie failes.
By this, Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his weary feet,and felt the ſand,
Breathleſſe albeit he were, he reſted not
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got :
And knockt,and call'd,at which celeſtiall noyſe,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioyes, (rings
Then Nymphes and Shepheards,when the ty mbrell
Or crooked Dolphin,when the Sayler ſings :
She ſtayd not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe,to the dore ſhe goes,
Where ſeeing a naked man, ſhe ſcriecht for feare ;
Such ſights as this to tender maids are rare,
And ranne into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich Iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
( lawne ; Vnto her was he led or rather drawne,
By thoſe white lims which ſparkled through the
The neerer that he came, the more ſhe fled,
And ſeeking refuge, ſlipt into her bed,
Whereon Leander ſitting, thus began,
Through numming cold, all feeble,faint and wan,

If not for loue,yet loue for pitty ſake,
Me in thy bed and maiden boſome take,
At leaſt,vouchſafe theſe armes ſome little roome,
Who hoping to imbrace thee,cheerely ſwome.
This head was beat vvith many a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Herewith affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her lukewarme place Leander lay,
Whoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The drooping thoughts of baſe declining ſoules,
Then drery Mars carowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare :
She ouercome with ſhame and ſallow feare,
Like chaſte Diana when Acteon ſpide her,
Being ſodainly betray'd, diu'd down to hide her,
And as her ſiluer body downward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſecure,
Orecaſt vvith dim and darkſome couerture ;
And now ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare,
Flatter, intreat, promiſe, proteſt and ſweare :
Yet euer after as he greedily aſſayd
To touch thoſe dainties, ſhe the Harpey playd,
And euery lim did as a Souldier ſtout,
Defend the fort, and keep the foe-men out.
For though the riſing yurie mount he ſcal'd,

Which is with azure circling liues empal'd,
Much like a globe, (a globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſayles to regions full of blis ?)
Yet there with Syſiphus he toyld in vaine,
Till gentle parly did the truce obtaine.
She trembling ſtroue, this ſtrife of hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat,
Of vnknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not woon, yet woon ſhe was at length :
In ſuch warres, women vſe but halfe their ſtrength.
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entred the Orchard of Th'eſperides.
Whoſe fruit none rightly can deſcribe but he,
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree ;
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe,ſpoke ſomething,and ſigh'd out the reſt,
Which ſo preuail'd, as he with ſmall adoe
Incloſ'd her in his armes, and kiſt her too,
And euery kiſſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme.
So that the truce was broke, and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſilly maiden) at his mercy was.
Loue is not full of pitry (as men ſay)
But deafe and cruell where he meanes to pray.
Euen as a bird, which in our hands we wring,
Forth plungeth, and oft flutters with her wing.

And now ſhe wiſht this night were neuer done,
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th' approching ſunne,
For much it grieu'd her that the bright day-light,
Should know the pleaſure of this bleſſed night,
And then like Mars and Ericine diſplayd,
Both in each others armes chain'd as they layd.
Againe, ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to him, who in a moment tooke
That which ſo long ſo charily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth away ſhe vvould haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone :
But as her naked feet vyere whipping out,
He on the ſuddaine cling'd her ſo about,
That Meremayd-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
One halfe appear'd, the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe (bluſhing) ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance behold ye might
A kind of twi-light break, which through the haire,
As from an orient cloud,glimſe here and there.
And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought forth the day before the day was borne.
So Hero's ruddy cheeke, Hero betrayd,
And her all naked to his ſight diſplayd.
Whence his admiring eyes more pleaſure tooke,
Than Dis, on heapes of gold fixing his looke.
By this Apollos golden harpe began,

To ſound forth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchfull Heſperus no ſooner heard,
But he the day bright-bearing Car prepar'd.
And ran before as Harbenger of light,
And vith his flaring beames mockt ougly night,
Till ſhe o recome with anguiſh, ſhame and rage,
Dang'd downe to hell her loathſome carriage.