NHelleſpont guiltie of true loues blood,
In view and oppoſit two cities ſtood,
Seaborders,diſioin'd by Neptunes might :
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos;Hero dwelt ; Hero the faire,
Whom young Appolo courted for her haire,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Vhere ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outfide of her garmentes were of lawne,
The lining, purple ſilke,with guilte ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene,and bordered with a groue,
Vhere Venus in her naked glorie ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eies,
Df proude Adonis that before her lies,
er kirtle blew,whereon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the blood of wretched louers ſlaine.

Vpon her head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the ground beneath,
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leaues,
Whoſe workmanſhip both man and beaſt deceiues.
Many would praiſe the ſweete ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When t'was the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for honie,Bees haue ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence,haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her necke,like Diamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloues,for neither ſunne nor winde
Would burne or parch her hands,but to her minde,
Or warme or coole them,for they tooke delite
To play vpon thoſe hands they were ſo white.
Buskins of ſhels all ſiluered, vſed ſhe,
And brancht with bluſhing corall to the knee ;
Where ſparrowes pearcht, of hollow pearle and gold,
Such as the world would woonder to behold :
Thoſe with ſweete water oft her handmaid fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherupe through the bils.
Some ſay,for her the faireſt Cupid pyn'd,
And looking in her face,was ſtroken blind.
But this is true,ſo like was one the other,
As he he imagin'd Hero was his mother.
And oftentimes into her boſome flew,
About her naked necke his bare armes threw.
And laid his childiſh head vpon her breſt,

And with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As nature wept,thinking ſhe was vndone ;
Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her than ſhe left ;
And of ſuch wondrous beautie her bereft :
Therefore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffred wrach :
ince Heroes timie,hath halfe the world been black.
Amorous Leander,beautifull and yoong,
Whoſe tragedie diuine Muſaus ſoong)
DNwelt at Abydus, ſince him,dwelt there none,
For whom ſucceeding times may greater mone.
His dangling treſſes that were neuer ſhorne,
Had they been cut,and vnto Colchos borne,
Vould haue allur'd the vent'rous youth of Greece,
To hazard more,than for the golden Fleece.
Faire Cynthia wiſht,his armes might be her ſpheare,
Ereefe makes her pale, becauſe ſhe mooues not there.
His bodie was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his hand.
Iuen as delicious meate is to the taſt,
lo was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
he white of Pelops ſhoulder,I could tell ye,
Iow ſmooth his breſt was,and how white his bellie,
nd whoſe immortall fingers did imprint,
hat heauenly path,with many a curious dint,
hat runs along his backe,but my rude pen,
n hardly blazon forth the loues of men.

Much ſeſſe of powerfull gods,let it ſuffiſe,
That my ſlacke muſe, ſings of Leanders eyes.
Thoſe orient cheekes and lippes,exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kis
Of his owne ſhadow,and deſpiſing many,
Died ere he could enioy the loue of any.
Had wilde Hippolitus Leander ſeene,
Enamoured of his beautie had he beene,
His preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh countrie dwelt,
The barbarous Thracian ſouldier mou'd with nough
VVas mooud with him,and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore he was a maide in mans attire,
For in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke, a ſpeaking eye,
A brow for loue to banquet royally,
And ſuch as knew he was a man would ſay
Leander,thou art made for amorous play :
Why art thou not in loue,and lou'd of all ?
Though thou be faire, yet be not thine owne thrall,
The men of wealthie Sestos, euery yeare,
(For his ſake whom their goddeſſe held ſo deare,
Roſe-cheekt Adonis) kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandered gueſt,
To meet their loues, ſuch as had none at all,
Came louers home,from this great feſtiuall.
For euerie ſtreete like to a firmamen.

Gliſtered with breathing ſtars,who where they went,
Frighted the melancholie earth, which deem'd,
Eternall heauen to burne,for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the ſonnes rich chariot.
But farre aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchanted gazers mind,
For like Sea-nimphs inueigling harmonie,
So was her beautie to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night wandring pale and watrie ſtarre,
(When yawning dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the gloomie skie,
Where crown'd with blaſing light and maieſtie,
She proudly ſits) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than ſhe the heartes of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as,when gawdie Nimphs purſue the chaſe,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggie footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heate, gallop amaine,
From ſteepe Pine bearing mountaines to the plaine :
So ran the people foorth to gaze vpon her,
And all that view'd her,were enamourd on her.
And as in furie of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtrooken,
So at her preſence all ſurpriſde and tooken,
Await the ſentence of her ſcornefull eies
He whom ſhe fauours liues,the other dies.

Ikere might you ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome (their violent paſſions to aſſwage )
Compile ſharpe Satyrs,but alas too late,
For faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate.
And many ſecing great Princes were denied,
Pin'd as they went,and thinking on her died.
On this feaſt day, O curſed day and hower,
Went Hero thorow Sestos,from her tower
To Venus temple,where vnhappily,
As after chanc'd, they did each other ſpie,
So faire a Church as this,had Venus none;
The wals were of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein was Protens caru'd, and ouer head
A liuely vine of greene ſea agget ſpread,
Where by one hand light headed Bachus hung,
And with the other,wine from grapes out wrung.
Of Chriſtall ſhining faire,the pauement was,
The towne of Sestos,calde it Venus glaſſe,
There might you ſee the gods in ſundrie ſhapes,
Committiug headdie ryots,inceſt,rapes :
For know,that vnderneath this raidiant flower,
Was Danacs ſtatue in a brazen tower,
Ioue, ſlylie ſtealing from his Siſters bed,
To dallie with Idalian Ganimed :
And for his loue Turopa, bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a clowd,
Blood-quaffing Mars, heauing the yron net,

Vhich limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire,to burne ſuch townes as Troy
Syluanus weeping for the louely boy,
That now is turnd into a Cypres tree,
Vnder whoſe ſhade the VVood-gods loue to be
And in the midſt a ſiluer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing turtles blood,
Taild to the ground, vailing her eie-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhe roſe :
Thence flew Loues arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone ſtill he ſtood,and euermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his countnance blazed,
Relenting Heros gentle heart was ſtrooke,
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue, or hate,
For will in vs is ouer-ruld by fate.
Vhen two are ſtript long ere the courſe begin,
VVe wiſh that one ſhould loſe,the other win.
And one eſpecially doo we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect,
The reaſon no man knowes,let it ſuffiſe,
VVhat we behold is cenſur'd by our eies.
VVhere both deliberat,the loue is flight,
Who euer lou'd that lou'd not at firſt ſight
He kneel'd,but vnto her deuoutly praid:
Chaſt Hero, to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſaid :

Were l the ſaint he worſhips,I would heare him,
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words,came ſomwhat neer him.
He ſtarted vp,ſhe bluſht as one aſham'd;
Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
He toucht her hand,in touching it ſhe trembled,
Loue deeply grounded, hardly is diſſembled.
Theſe louers parled by the touch of hands,
True loue is mute,and oft amazed ſtands,
Thus while dumb ſigns their yeelding harts entangled,
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was ſpangled,
And night deepe drencht in myſtie Acheron,
Heau'd vp her head, and halfe the world vpon,
Breath'd darkneſſe forth (darke night is Cupids day)
And now begins Leander to diſplay
Loues holy fire,with words,with ſighs and teares,
Which like ſwecte muſicke entered Heroes eares,
And yet at euerie word ſhee turn'd aſide,
And alwaies cut him off as he replide,
At laſt,like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With chearefull hope thus he accoſted her.
Faire creature,let me ſpeake without offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts,as thy faire lookes do mine,
Then ſhouldeſt thou bee his priſoner who is thine.
Be not vnkind and faire, miſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behauour boiſterous and ruffe.
O ſhun me not, but heare me ere you goe,

Bod knowes I cannot force loue,as you doe.
Hy words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending,
from Venus altar to your footeſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceede her farre,
To whom you offer, and whoſe Nunne you are,
Why ſhould you worſhip her,her you ſurpaſſe,
Is much as ſparkling Diamonds flaring glaſſe.
Diamond ſet in lead his worth retaines,
heauenly Nimph,belou'd of humane ſwaines,
keceiues no blemiſh,but oft-times more grace,
Which makes me hope, although I am but baſe,
Saſe in reſpect of thee,diuine and pure,
Dutifull ſeruice may thy loue procure,
And I in dutie will excell all other,
Is thou in beautie doeſt exceede loues mother.
Yor heauen,nor thou,were made to gaze vpon,
Is heauen preſerues all things,ſo ſaue thou one.
ſtately builded ſhip,well rig'd and tall,
he Ocean maketh more maieſticall :
Vhy voweſt thou then no liue in Seſtos heere,
Vho on Loues ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeare ?
Like vntun'd golden ſtrings all women are,
Which long time lie vntoucht,will harſhly iarre.
eſſels of braſſe oft handled, brightly ſhine,
Vhat difference betwixt the richeſt mine

And baſeſt mold, but vſe ? for both not vſde,
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abuſde,
When miſers keepe it ; being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes,themſelues and others doe adorne,
Neither themſelues nor others,if not worne.
VVho builds a pallace and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero,learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh,
Lone women like to emptie houſes periſh.
Leſſe ſince the poore rich man that ſtarues himſelfe,
In he aping vp a maſſe of droſſie pelfe,
Than ſuch as you : his golden earth remains.
Which after his diſceaſſe ſome other gains.
But this faire iem ſweet, in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence,can be bequeath'd to none.
Or if it could,downe from th'enameld skie,
All heauen would come to claime this legacie,
And with inteſtine broyles the world deſtroy,
And quite confound natures ſweet harmonie.
Well therefore by the gods decrced it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that blis.
One is no number,maids are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſocietie of men.
Wilt thou liue ſingle ſtill: one ſhalt thou bee,
Though neuer-ſingling Iymen couple thee.
Wild ſauages,that drinke of runping ſprings,

Thinke water farre excels all earthly things :
But they that daily taſte neat wine,deſpiſe it.
irginitie, albeit ſome highly priſe it,
ompar'd with mariage,had you tride them both,
Differs as much,as wine and water doth.
aſe boullion for the ſtamps ſake we alow,
Iuen ſo for mens impreſſion do we you.
y which alone,our reuerend fathers ſay ;
Yomen receiue perfection euery way.
his idoll which you terme Virginitie,
neither eſſence ſubiect to the eie,
Io,nor to any one exterior ſence,
Ior hath it any place of reſidence,
or is t 'of earth or mold celeſtiall,
r capable of any forme at all.
f that which hath no being,do not boaſt,
ſhings that are not at all,are neuer loſt.
len fooliſhly doe call it vertuous,
hat vertue is it, that is borne with vs ?
ſuch leſſe can honour be aſcribde thereto,
lonour is purchaſde by the deedes we doe.
Fleeue me Hero, honour is not wone,
htill ſome honourable deed be done.
leke you for chaſtitie,immortall fame,
hd know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name?
hoſe name is it, if ſhe be falſe or not,
ſhe be faire, but ſome vile tongues will blot ?

But you are faire(aye ne) ſo wonderous faire,
So young,ſo gentle,and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke,if thus you liue alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then Hero hate me not,nor from me flie,
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamie.
Perhaps, thy ſacred Prieſthood makes thee loath,
Tell me,to whom mad ſt thou that heedeleſſe oath,
To Venus,anſwered ſhee,and as ſhee ſpake,
Foorth from thoſe two tralucent ceſternes brake
A ſtreame of liquid pearle, which downe her face
Made milk-white paths,whereon the gods might tra,
To Ioues high court. He thus replide : The rites
In which Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,
Are banquets,Doricke muſicke,midnight-reuell,
Plaies,maskes,and all that ſterne age counteth euill,
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thou in vowing chaſtitie,haſt ſworne
To rob her name and honour,and thereby
Commit'ſt a ſinne farre worſe than periurie.
Euen ſacriledge againſt her Deitie,
Through regular and formall puritie.
To expiat which ſinne,kiſſe,and ſhake handes,
Such ſacrifice as this, Venus demands.
There at ſhe ſmilde,and did denie him ſo,
Asput therebyyetmight he hope for mo:
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his ſpee

And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold Virginitie,
The gentle Queene of Loues ſole enemie.
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nun,
When Venus ſweet rites are perform'd and dun,
Flint breſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your miſtreſſe are at ſtrife.
LLoue Hero then,and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeeres with auarice,
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt corne dies,if it be not reapt,
Beautie alone is loſt,too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he vs'd, and many more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded,that was woone before,
Heroes lookes yeelded,but her words made warre,
Women are woon when they begin to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallow'd Cupids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd the deeper was ſhe ſtrooke.
Yet euilly faining anger,ſtroue ſhe ſtill,
And would be thought to grant againſt her will.
Bo hauing paus'd a while,at laſt ſhe ſaid :
Who taught thee Rhetoricke to deceiue a maid :
Aye me,ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhorre,
And yet I like them for the Orator.

With that Leander ſtoopt,to haue imbrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him. Gentle youth forbeare
To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke,and vnderneath a hill,
Far from the towne (where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saue that the ſea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends forth a ratling murmure to the land,
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſit vs.)
My turret ſtands,and there God knowes I play
With Venus ſwannes and ſparrowes all the day.
A dwarfiſh beldame beares me company,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And ſpendes the night(that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe,and apiſh merriment.
Come thither ; As ſhe ſpake this,her tongue tript,
For vnawares ( Come thither ) from her ſlipt,
And ſodainly her former colour chang'd,
And here and there her eies through anger rang'd,
And like a planet,moouing ſeuerall waies,
At one ſelfe inſtant,ſhe poore ſoule aſſaies,
Louing,not to loue at all,and euerie part,
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her heart.
And hands ſo pure,ſo innocent,nay ſuch,
As might haue made heauen ſtoope to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vphold to Venus,and againe,

Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtitie,but all in vaine,
Cupid beates downe her prayers with his wings,
Her vowes aboue the emptie aire he flings :
All deepe enrag'd, his ſinowie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtrooken, look't ſo dolefully,
As made Loue ſigh,to ſee his tirannie.
And as ſhe wept,her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd,
Then towards the pallace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment and griefe he flies.
And to thoſe ſterne nymphes humbly made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other,and be bleſt,
But with a ghaſtly dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouſand deaths at euerie glance,
They anſwered Loue, nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word, their hate to him was ſuch.
Harken a while, and I will tell you why :
Heauens winged herrald, Ioue-borne Mercurie,
The ſelfe-ſame day that he aſleep had laid
Inchanted Argus, ſpied a countrie maid,
Whoſe careleſſe haire, in ſtead of pearle t'adorne it :
Gliſtred with deaw,as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it :
Her breath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure,and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet prowd ſhe was,(for loftie pride that dwels
In tow'red courts,is oft in ſhepheards cels.)

And too too well the faire vermilion knew,
And ſiluer tincture of her cheekes, that drew,
The loue of euery ſwaine : On her this god
Enamoured was, and with his ſnakie rod,
Did charme her nimble feet,and made her ſtay,
The while vpon the hillocke downe he lay,
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancie to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt,
And then he woo'd wi,h kiſſes,and at laſt,
As ſhepheards do,her on the ground he laid,
And tumbling in the graſſe,he often ſtraid
Beyond the bounds of ſhame,in being bold
To eie thoſe partes, which no eie ſhould behold.
And like an inſolent commaunding louer,
Boaſting his parentage,would needes diſcouer
The way to new Eliſium : but ſhe,
Whoſe onely dower was her chaſtitie,
Hauing ſtriu ne in vaine, was now about to crie,
And craue the helpe of ſhepheards that were nie.
Herewith he ſtaid his furie,and began
To giue her leaue to riſe,away ſhe ran,
After went Mercurie,who vſde ſuch cunning,
As ſhe to heare his tale,left off her running.
Maides are not woon by brutiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſures and delight.
And knowing Hermes courted her,was glad

That ſhe ſuch louelineſſe and beautie had,
As could prouoke his liking, yet was mute,
And neither would denie,nor graunt his ſute.
Still vow'd he loue,ſhe wanting no excuſe,
To ſeede him with delaies,as women vſe :
Dr hirſtiug after immortalitie,
All women are ambitious naturally,
mpoſde vpon her louer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe,nor yet ſhe aske.
A draught of flowing Nectar ſhe requeſted,
Wherewith the king of Gods and men is feaſted.
He ready to accompliſh what ſhe wild,
'tole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe, Ioues cup fild,)
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike loue,
Which being knowne(as what is hid from loue )
Ie inly ſtor m'd,and waxt more furious,
Than for the fire filcht by Promethius;
And thruſts him down from heauen he wandring here,
hn mournfull tearmes,with ſad and heauie cheere
Complained to Cupid, Cupid for his ſake,
To be reueng'd on Ioue,did vndertake,
And thoſe on whom heauen,earth,and hell relies,
meane the Adamantine Deſtinies,
e wounds with loue,and forſt them equally,
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercurie.
They offred him the deadly fatall knife,
That ſheares the flender threads of humane life,

At his faire feathered feet, the engins laid,
Which th'earth rrom ougly Chaos den vp-waid :
Theſe he regarded not,but did intreat,
That Ioue, vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he crau'd, and once againe,
Saturne and Ops, began their golden raigne.
Murder, rape, warre,luſt and trecherie,
Were with Ioue clos'd in Stigian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got,
He reckleſſe of his promiſe,did deſpiſe
The loue of th'euerlaſting Deſtinies.
They ſeeing it, both Loue and him abhor'd,
And Iupiter vnto his place reſtor'd.
And but that Learning,in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeate of Ioue it ſelfe aduance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and Pouertie ſhould alwaies kis.
And to this day is euerie ſcholler poore,
Groſſe gold from theni runs headlong to the Boore.
Likewiſe the angrie ſiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelues on Hermes, haue concluded
That Midas brood ſhallſit in honors chaire,

To which the Muſes ſonnes are onely heire :
And fruitfull wits that in aſpiringare,
Shall diſcontent run into regions farre ;
And few great Lords in vertuous deeds ſhall ioy,
But be ſurpris'd with euery gariſh toy.
And ſtill inrich the loftie ſeruile Clowne,
Who with incroching guile,keepes learning downe.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuite no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the Fates were iniured.

Y this,ſad Hero,with loue vnacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face,fell downe and fainted.
He kiſt her, and breath'd life into her lips,

Where with as one diſpleaſde,away ſhe tripa
Yet as ſhe went,full often lookt behinde,
And many poore excuſes did ſhe find,
To linger by the way, and once ſhe ſtaid,
And would haue turnde againe,but was afraid,
In offering parly, to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes, and in her idle flight,
Her painted fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a nouice,knew not what ſhe meant,
But ſtaid,and after her a letter ſent.
Which ioyfull Hero anſwerd in ſuch ſort,
As he had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall graces lock'd their wealth,
And therefore to her tower he got by ſtealth,
Wide open ſtood the doore,he need not clime;
And ſhe her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Had ſpread the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome
And oft look'd out, and mus'd he did not come.
At laſt he came, O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedie louers had at their firſt meeting.
He askt,ſhe gaue,and nothing was denied,
Both to each other quickly were affied.
Looke how their hands,ſo were their hearts vni,
And what he did,ſhe willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kiſſes, the inibracements ſweet,
When like deſires and affections meer,

For from the earth to heauen,is Cupid rais'd,
Where fancie is in equall ballance pais'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhneſſe ſodainly repented,
And turn'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented.
As if her name and honour had beene wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I,and ſhee wiſht,albeit not from her hart,
That he would leaue her turret and depart.
The mirthfull God of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Nymph beguild.
For hitherto hee did but fan the fire,
And kept it downe that it might mount the hier.
Now waxt ſhe iealous,leaſt his loue abated,
Fearing,her owne thoughts made her to be hated.
Therefore vnto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmacis,her body throes
Vpon his boſome,where with yeelding eies,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger,if liee were diſpleas'd,
O what god would not therewith be appeas'd :
Liks Æſops cocke,this iewell heenioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
uppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good will had wone.
But know you not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haue a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduance a ſtep,

Mou'd by Loues force,vnto ech other lep?
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect.
Albeit Lean der rude in loue, and raw,
Long dallying with Hero,nothing ſaw
That might delight him more,yet he ſuſpected
Some amorous rites or other were neglected.
Therefore vnto his bodie,hirs he clung,
She, fearing on the ruſhes to be flung,
Striu'd with redoubled ſtrength,the more ſhe ſtriued,
The more a gentle pleaſing heat reuiued,
Which taught him all that elder louers know,
And now the ſame gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine termes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it,
Loue alwaies makes thoſe eloquent that haue it.
Shee,with a kind of graunting,put him by it,
And euer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,
Like to the tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lauiſh,ſau'de her maydenhead.
Ne re king more ſought to keepe his diademe,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gemme.
Aboue our life we loue a ſtedfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of great worth we ſend,
We often kiſſe it,often looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gon :
No maruell then,though Hero would not yeeld
So ſoone to part from that ſhe deerely held.

ſewels being loſt are found againe,this neuer,
Tis loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for euer.
Now had the morne eſpy'de her louers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhe ſtarts,puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that,he ſtayd ſo long,
All headlong throwes her ſelfe the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbraſt her ſodainly,tooke leaue,and kiſt,
Long was he taking leaue and loath to go,
And kiſt againe,as louers vſe to do,
Sad Hero wroong him by the hand,and wept,
Saying,let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore,ſhe turnd about,
As loath to ſee Leander goin gout.
And now the ſunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe louers,downeward creepes.
So that in ſilence of the cloudie night,
Though it was morning,did he take his flight.
But what the ſecret truſtie night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Where with ſhe wreath'd her largely ſpreading heare,
Nor could the youth abſtaine,but he muſt weare
The ſacred ring wherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious chaſtitie ſhe vow'd:
Which made his loue through Seſtps to bee knowne,

And thenee vnto Aydus ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſaile,for incorporeal Fame,
Whoſe waight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
Is ſwifter than the wind,whoſe tardie plumes,
Are reeking water,and dull earthlie fumes.
Home when he came,he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled aire thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in d forren place,and ſtraight from thence,
Acides like,by mightie violence,
He would haue chac'd away the ſwelling maine,
That him from her vniuſtly did detaine.
Like as the ſunne in a Dyameter,
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heateth kindly,ſhining lat'rally ;
So beautie,ſweetly quickens when t'is ny,
But being ſeparated and remooued,
Burnes where it cheriſht,murders where it loued.
Therefore euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was yoong Leanders looke.
O none but gods haue power their loue to hide,
Affection by the count'nance is deſcride,
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd,betraies poore louers.
His ſecret flanie apparantly was ſeene,
Leanders Father knew where hee had been,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk't his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparckles new begonne.

But loue reſiſted once,growes paſſionate,
And nothing more than counſaile, louers hate.
or as a hote prowd horſe highly diſdaines,
To haue his head control'd,but breakes the raines,
ſpits foorth the ringled bit, and with his houes,
Checkes the ſubmiſſiue ground : ſo hee that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd,the woorſe he fares,
What is it now,but mad Leander dares ?
Hero, Hero, thus he cry'de full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft.
Where hauing ſpy'de her tower,long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'd the narrow toyling Helleſpont,
To part in twaine, that he might come and go,
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no.
With that hee ſtript him to the yu'rie skin,
And crying,Loue I come,leapt liuely in.
Vhereat the ſaphir viſag'd god grew prowd,
Ind made his capring Triton ſound alowd,
magining,that Ganimed diſpleas'd,
lad left the heauens,therefore on him hee ſeaz'd.
Leander ſtriu'd, the waues about him wound,
Ind puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Vas ſtrewd with pearle,and in low corrall groues,
weet ſinging Mermaids, ſported with their loues
)n heapes of heauie gold,and tooke great pleaſure,
'o ſpurne in careleſſe ſort,the ſhipwracke treaſure.
or here the ſtately azure pallace ſtood,

Where kingly Neptune and his traine abode,
The luſtie god imbraſt him,cald him loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to Ioue.
But when he knew it was not G animed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp,and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple mace,
Which mounted vp,intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt him
Leander being vp,began to ſwim,
And looking backe,ſaw Neptune follow him.
Whereat agaſt, the poore ſoule gan to crie,
O let me viſite Hero ere I die.
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the ſea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He clapt his plumpe cheekes,with his treſſes playd,
And ſmiling wantonly,his loue bewrayd.
He watcht his armes,and as they opend wide,
At euery ſtroke,betwixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe,and then run out and daunce,
And as he turnd,caſt many a luſtfull glaunce,
And threw him gawdie toies to pleaſe his eie,
And diue into the water,and there prie
Vpon his breaſt,his thighs,and euerie lim,
And vp againe,and cloſe beſide him ſwim.
And talke of loue : Leander made replie,
You are deceau'd,I am no woman I,

hereat ſmilde Neptune, and then told a tale,
Iow that a ſheapheard ſitting in a vale,
layd with a boy ſo faire and kind,
sfor his loue,both earth and heauen pyn'd,
hat of the cooling riuer durſt not drinke,
eaſt water-nymphs ſhould pul him from the brinke.
nd when hee ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Bote-footed Satyrs, and vp-ſtaring Fawnes,
Vould ſteale him thence. Ere halfe this tale was done,
lye me, Leander cryde,th'enamoured ſunne,
hat now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſie bower,
)eſcends vpon my radiant Heroes tower.
that theſe tardie armes of mine were wings,
Ind as he ſpake, vpon the waues he ſprings.
Yeptune was angrie that he gaue no eare,
ind in his heart reuenging malice bare :
le flung at him his mace,but as it went,
Ie cald it in,for loue made him repent.
he mace returning backe,his owne hand hit,
Is meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
hen this freſh bleeding wound Leander viewd,
lis colour went and came,as if he rewd
ſhe greefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſts,
felenting thoughts,remorſe and pitie reſts.
Ind who haue hard hearts,and obdurat minds,
ut vicious,harebrainde,and illit'rat hinds ?
itie to be moued, he god ſeeing hint with p.

Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith,too credulous,
With follie and falſe hope deluding vs.
Wherefore Leanders fancie to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſedome to giue much,a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſwading Oratorie failes.
By this Leander being nere the land,
Caſt downe his wearie feet,and felt the ſand.
Breathleſſe albeit he were,he reſted not.
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got.
And knockt and cald,at which celeſtiall noiſe,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioies
Then Nymphs & Sheapheards,when the timbrel ring
Or crooked Dolphin when the Sailer ſings;
She ſtayd not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe,to the dore ſhe goes.
Where ſeeing a naked man,ſhe ſcriecht for feare,
Such ſights as this,to tender maids are rare.
And ran into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
Vnto her was he led,or rather drawne,
By thoſe white limmes, which ſparckled throughs
The neerer that he came,the more ſhe fled, Au
And ſeeking refuge,ſlipt into her bed.
Whereon Leander ſitting,thus began,
Through numming cold,all feeble,faint and wan :

If not for loue, yet loue for pittie ſake,
Me in thy bed and maiden boſome take,
At leaſt vouchſafe theſe armes ſome little roome,
Who hoping to embrace thee,cherely ſwome.
TThis head was beat with many a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Herewith afrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her luke-warme place Leander lay.
Whoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The dt ooping thoughts of baſe declining ſoules,
Then drerie Mars,carowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare,
She ouercome with ſhame and ſallow feare,
Like chaſt Diana, when Acteon ſpyde her,
Being ſodainly betraide,dyu'd downe to hide her.
And as her ſiluer body downeward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſecure,
O'recaſt with dim aud darkſome couerture,
And now ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare,
Flatter,intreat,promiſe,proteſt and ſweare,
Yet euer as he greedily aſſayd
To touch thoſe dainties,ſhe the Harpey playd,
And euery lim did as a ſoldier ſtout,
Defend the fort,and keep the foe-man out.
For though the riſing yu'rie mount he ſcald,

Which is with azure circling lines empal'd,
Muth like a globe,ſa globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſailes to regions full of blis,
Yet there with Siſipous he toyld in vaine,
Ti I gentle parlie did the truce obtaine.
Che ing ſtroue,this ſtrife of hers (like that
Whh le the world) another world begat,
Orvknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelſe ſhe ſot ght.
Seeming not woon,yet woon ſhe was at length,
In ſuch wares women vſe but halfe their ſtrength.
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entred the orchard of I h'eſperides.
Whoſe fruit none rightly can deſcribe,but hee
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree :
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe ſpoke ſome thing,and ſigh'd out the rou;,
Which ſo preuaild,as he with ſmall ado,
Inclos'd her in his armes and kiſt her to.
And euerie kiſſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme.
So that the truce was broke,and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſillie maiden) at his mercie was.
Loue is not full of pittie (as men ſay)
But deaffe and cruell,where he meanes to pr
Euen as a bird,which in our hands we wring,
Foorth plungeth,and oft flutters with her wing.

And now ſhe wiſht this night were neuer done,
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th'approching ſunne,
For much it greeu'd her that the bright day-light,
Bhould know the pleaſure of this bleſſed night.
And then like Mars and Ericine diſplayd,
Both in eace others armes chaind as they layd.
Againe ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Dr ſpeake to him who in a moment tooke,
T hat which ſo long ſo charily ſhe kept,
And ſaine by ſtealth away ſhe would haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were whipping out,
He on the ſuddaine cling'd her ſo about,
That Meremaid-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
One halfe appear'd the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe bluſhing ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance behold ye might,
A kind of twilight breake,which through the heare,
As froman orient cloud,glymſe here and there.
And round about the chaniber this falſe morne,
Frought foorth the day before the day was borue.
o Heros ruddie cheeke,Hero betrayd,
And her all naked to his ſight diſplayd.
Whence his admiring eyes more plcaſure tooke,
Than Dis,on heapes of gold fixing his looke.
Py this Apollos golden harpe began,

To ſound foorth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchfull Heſperus no ſooner heard,
But he the day bright-bearing Car prepar'd.
And ran before,as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ougly night,
Till he o'recome with anguiſh,ſhame,and rage,
Dang'd downe to hell her loathſome carriage.