N Helleſpont guilty of true Loyes blood,
In view and oppoſire two ciries ſtood,
Seaborderers,diſ-ioynd by Neptunes might,
The one Abydos,th'other Seſtos neight.
At Sestos Hero dwelt,Hero the faire,
Whom yong Apollo courte'd for her haire,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze upon.
The out-ſide of her garments were of Lawne,
The linnen purple ſilke,with guilt ſtars drawne,
Her wide ſleeyes greene,and bordered with a groye,
Where Venus in her naked glory ſtroye,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eyes

Of proud Adonis that before her lyes :
Her kirtle blew,whereon was many a ſtayne;
Made with the blood of wretched Lovers ſlayne.
Vpon her head ſhee wore a myrtle Wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the ground beneath.
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leayes,
Whofe workmanſhip both man and Beaſt deceiyes.
Many would prayſe the ſweet ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When 't was the odour which her breath foorth caſt.
And there for honey,Bees haye ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence,haye lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaynes of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her necke,like Dyamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloyes, for neyther Sunne nor Wind,
Would burne or parch her hands,but to her mind,
Or warnie or coole them : for they tooke delight
To rI y upon thoſe hands, they were ſo white :
Buskins or ſh'ls all ſilyered, uſed ſhee,
And brancht with bluſhing Corall to the knee,
Where Sparowes pearch't, of hollow pearle and gold,
Such as the World would wen er to behold :
Thoſe with ſweet water oft her hand-mayd fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherup througirthe bils.
So ne ſay , for her the faireſt Cupid pin'd ;
And looking in her face,was ſtrucken blind.
But this is true , ſo like was one the other,
As heimagin'd Hero was his mother :
And of'entimes into her boſome flew,
A bout her naked necke his bare armes threw,
And layd his childiſh head upon her breſt,
A'd with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So loyely faire was Hero, Venus Nun.
As Nature wept, thinking ſhe was undone,

Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her then ſhe left,
And of ſuch wondrous beauty her bereft ;
Therefore in ſigne her vreafure ſuffered wracke,
Since Heroes time hath halfe the world beene blacke.
Amorous Leander, beautifull and young
( Whoſe Tragady divine Muſaus ſung)
Dwelt at Abides,ſince him dwelt there none,
For whom,ſucceeding rimes make greater mone.
His dandling treſſes that were never ſhorne,
Had they beene cut,and unto Celchos borne,
Would haye allured the ventrous youth of Greece,
To hazzard more than for the golden fleece.
Faire Cyntbra wiſht his armes might be her ſphe
Griefe makes her pale,becauſe ſhe moyes not there.
His body was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Io ve might haye ſipt out Nectar from his hand:
Eyen as delicious meate is to the taſt :
So was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops ſhoulder : I could tell yee
How ſmooth his breaſt was,and ho w white his belly,
And whoſe immortall fingers did imprint
That heavenly path,with many a curious dint
That runs along his backe;but my rude pen
Can hardly blazon forth the loyes of men.
Much leſſe of powerfull gods, let it ſuffice,
That my ſlacke Muſe muſt ſing of Leanders eyes,
Theſe orient cheekes and lips, exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kiſſe
Of his owne ſhadow, and deſpiſing ma y,
Dyed ere he could enioy the loye of any.
Had wilde Hyppolitus Leander ſeene,
Enamoured of his beauty had he beene,
His preſence made the rueeſt paifant melt

That in the vaſt uplandiſh Countrey dwelt,
The barb'rous Thracian ſouldier moy'd with nought,
Was moy'd with him,and for his fayour ſought.
Some ſwore he was a maid in mars attire,
For in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſniling cheeke,a ſpeaking eye,
A brow for Loye to banquet royally ;
And ſuch as knew he was a man,would ſay,
Leander, thou art made for amorous play,
Why art thou not in loye,and loy'd of all?
Though thou be faire,yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of wealthy Seſtos eyery yeare,
For his ſake whom their goddeſſe held ſo deare,
Roſe-checkt Adonis kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandred gueſt,
To meet their loyes ; ſuch as had none at all,
Canie loyers home from this great feaſtivall.
For every ſtreet like to a Firmament,
Gliſtred with breathing ſtars,who,where they went,
Frighted the Melancholly earth which deem'd
Etcrnall heayen to burne,for ſo it ſeem'd;
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the Suns rich Chariot.
But farre aboye the loyelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole oway th'inchanted gazers minde :
For like Sea-nymphes inveigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night-wandring pale and watry ſtarre,
( When yawning Dragons drew her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount up to the gloomy sky
Where crown'd with blazing light and Maieſty
She proudly ſits) more oyer-rules the flood
Then ſhe the hearts of thoſe that neare her ſtood.

Eyen as when gaudy Nymphes purfue the chaſe,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggy-footed race,
Incenſt with ſavage heate,gallop amaine,
From ſteep Pine-bearing mountains to the Plaine :
So ranne the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that view'd her,were enamour'd on her.
And as in fury of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtrooken,
So at her preſence all ſurpriz'd and tooken,
A waite the ſentence of her ſcornfull eyes :
He whom ſhe favours liyes, the other dyes.
There might you ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome (their violent paſſions to aſſwage)
Compile ſharpe Satyres, but alaſſe too late,
For faithfull loye will neyer turne to hate,
And many ſeeing great Princes were cenyed,
Pin'd as they went,and thinking on her, dyed.
On this feaſt day, O curſed day and houre,
Went Hero thorow Seſtos,from hertowre
To Venus Temple,where unhappily
As after chanc'd, they did each other ſpy,
So faire a Church as this had Venus none,
The walls were of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein was Proteus carv'd,and oyer head
A lively Vine of greene ſea agget ſpread,
Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other, Wine from grapes out-wrung.
Of Chry ſtall ſhining faire the payement was,
The towne of Seſtos call'd it Venus glaſſe;
There might you ſee the gods in ſundry ſhapes,
Committing heady ryots,inceſt,rapes,
For know that underneath this radiant flower

Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen tower,
Iowe ſlily ſtealing from his fiſters bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganimed;
And for his loye Europa bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rain-bow in a cloud:
Blood-quaffing Mars heaving the iron net,
VVhich limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet
Loye kindling fire to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Sil vanus weeping for the loyely boy,
That now is turn'd into a Cypres tree,
Vnder whoſe ſhade the VVood-gods loye to be.
And in the midſt a filyer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing Turtles blood,
Tayl'd to the ground,vailing her eye-lids cloſe,
And mode ſtly they opened as ſhe roſe.
Thence flew Loyes arrow with the golden head:
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone-ſtill he ſtood,and eyermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his count'nance blazed,
Relenting Heroes gentle heart was ſtrooke :
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loye or hate s
For will in us is oyer-rul'd by Fate.
VVhen two are ſtript long ere the courſe beginne,
VVe wiſh that one ſhould loſe, the other wirme,
And one eſpecially doe we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect ;
The reaſon no man knowes : let it ſuffice,
VVhat we behold is cenſur'd by our eyes.
VVhere both deliberate, the loye is ſlight.
VVho eyer loy'd,that loy'd nor at firſt ſights
He kneeld, but unto her devoutly prayd :
Chaſte Hero to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſaid ;

VVere I the Saint he worſhips,I would beare him :
And as ſhe ſpake theſe words came ſomething near him :
He ſtarted up, ſhe bluſht as one aſham'd,
Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
He toucht her hand,in touching it, ſhe trembled :
Love deeply ground hardly is diſſembled.
Theſe Loyeis parled by the touch of hands,
True loye is mute,and oft amazed ſtands.
Thus while dumb ſignes their yeelding harts intangled,
The aire with ſparkes of living fire was ſpangled,
And night deepe drencht in miſtie Acheron,
Heav'd up her head,and halfe the world upon,
Breath'd darkneſſe forth, (darke night is Cupids day
And now begins Leander to diſplay
Loyes holy fire,with words,with ſighes,and te
VVhich like ſweete muſicke entred Heroes eares.
A nd yet at eyery word ſhe turn'd aſide,
And alwayes cut him off as he replide.
At laſt,like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With cheerefull hope thus he accofted he,
Faire creature let me ſpeake without offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts as thy faire lookes doe mine,
Then ſhouldſt thou be his priſoner who is thine.
Be not unkinde and faire : miſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behaviour boy ſterous and ruffe.
O ſhunne me not,but heare me ere you goe,
God knowes I cannot force loye as you doe.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicity and naked truth.
This ſacrifice ( whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending,
From Venus Altay to your foot. ſteps bending)
Doth reſtifie that you exceede her farre,

To whom you offer,and whoſe Nunne you are.
Why ſhould you worſhip her? her you ſurpaſſe,
As much as ſparkling Diamonds,flaring glaſſe.
A Diamond ſet in Lead,his worth retaines :
A heav'nly Nymph beloy'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiyes no blemiſh,but oft.times more grace;
Which makes me hope, although I am but baſe ;
Baſe,in reſpect of thee divine and pure,
Dutifull ſervice may thy loye procure :
And I in duty will excell all other,
As thou in beauty doſt exceede Loyes mother.
Nor heay'n,nor thou were made to gaze upon,
As heav'n preſerves all things,ſo ſaye thou one,
A ſtately builded ſhip,well rigg'd and tall,
Thc Ocean maketh more maieſticall :
Why vowſt thou then to liye in Seſtos here,
Who on Loyes ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeares,
Like untun'd golden ſtrings,all women are ;
Which long time lye untoucht,will harſhly iarre,
Veſſels of Braſſe,oft handled,brightly ſhine :
What difference betweene the richeſt Mine,
And baſeſt mould,but uſe? for both,not us'd,
Are of like worth, Then treaſure is abus'd,
When miſers keepe it ; being put to lone,
In time it will returne us two for ones
Rich robes,them ſelyes and others dloe adorne,
Neither themſelyes nor others,if not worne,
Who builds a Palace,and rams up the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero,learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh :
Lone women like to empty houſes periſh ;
Leſſe ſins the poore-rich man that ſtaryes himſelfe,
In heaping up a Maſſe of droſſie pelfe,

Then ſuch as you his golden earth remaines,
Which after his diſeaſe ſome other gaines.
But this faire Iemme ſweet in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence can be bequeath'd to nones
Or if it could,downe from the enamel'd sky,
All heayen would come to claime this legacy ;
And with inteſtine broy les the world deſtroy,
And quite confound Natures ſweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that bliſſe ?
One is no number : Maides are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſociety of Men.
Wilt thou liye ſingle ſtill: one ſhalt thou be,
Though neyer-ſingling Hymen couple thee.
Wilde Savages that drinke of running ſprings,
Thinke water ſarre excels all earthly things,
But they that daily taſte ſweet wine deſpiſe it ;
Virginity, albeit ſome highly prize it,
Compar'd with marriage,had you try'd them both,
Differs as much as Wine and water doth.
Baſe bullion for the ſtampes ſake we allow,
Eyen ſo for mens impreſſions doe we you,
By which alone,our reyerend Fathers ſay,
Women receiye perfection eyery way.
This Idoll which you terme Virginity,
Is neither eſſence ſubiect to the cye.
No, nor to any one exteriorſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence.
Nor is't of earth or mould celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.
Of that which hath no being doe not boaſt :
Things that are not at all are never loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous;

What vertue is it that is borne with us ?
Much leſſe can honour be aſcrib'd thereto.
Honour is purchas'd by the deeds we doe.
Beleeye me Hero,honout is not wonne,
Vhtill ſome honourable deede be done.
Seeke you for chaſtity, immortall fame,
And know that ſome haye wrong'd Dianas name.
Whoſe name is it , if ſhe be falſe or not,
So ſhe be faire, but ſome vile tongues will blot ?
But you are faire(ay me) ſo wondrous faire,
So young,ſo gentle,and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke,if thus you liye alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then Hero hate me nor,nor from me fly
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamy :
Perhaps thy ſacred Prieſt-hood makes thee loath:
Tell me to whom thou mad'ſt that heedleſſe oath?
To Venus anſwered ſhe : and as ſhe ſpake,
Forth ffom thoſe two tralucent ciſternes brake,
A ſtreame of liquid pearle,which downe her face,
Made milk-white pathes,wheron the gods might trace
To Ioves high Court : He thus replide : The rites
In which Loyes beauteous Empreſſe moſt delights,
Are banquets, Doricse muſicke ; midnight reyell
Playes, Maskes, and all that ſterne age counteth evill.
Thee as a holy Ideot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thon in vowing chaſtity haſt ſworne,
To rob her name and honour,and thereby
Committ'ſt a ſinne ſarre worſe than periury,
Fven ſacril'dge acainſt her Dei y,
ongh regular and formal purity.
To ex which ſinne,kiſſe, ſhake hands,
Such ſacrifice as this Fenus demands.

Thereat ſhe ſmil'd,and did deny him ſo,
As put there by,yet might he hope for moe,
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his ſpeech,
And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither Gods nor men may thee deſerye,
Yet for her ſake whom you haye vow'd to ſerye,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold virginity,
The gentle Queene of Loyes ſole eneniy,
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nunne,
When Venus ſweete rites are perſorm'd and done.
Flint-breaſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your Miſtris are at ſtrife.
Loye Hero then,and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeares with ayarice.
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt Corne dyes if'it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is loſt,too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he us'd,and many more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded that was wonne before,
Hcroes lookes yeelded,but her words made warre,
Wonien are won,when they beginne to iarre.
Thus having ſwallow'd Cupids golden hooke,
The niore ſhe ſtriv'd, the deeper was ſhe ſtrooke,
Yet evilly faining anger,ſtroye ſhe ſtill,
And would be thonght to grant againſt her will :
So having paus'd a while,at laſt ſhe ſaid,
Who taught thee ſthetoricke to deceiye a maid :
Ay me,ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhor,
And yet I like them for the Orator,
With that Leander ſtoopt to haye embrac'd he
But from his ſ preading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him : Gencle youth, oro eare

To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke,and underneath a hill,
Farre from the towne(where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saye that the ſea playing upon yellow ſand.
Sends forth a rattling murmure to the land :
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſit us.)
My turret ſtands,and there God knowes I play
VVith Venus ſwannes,and ſparrowes all the day,
A dwarfiſh beldam keepes me company.
That hops about the chamber where I lye ;
And ſpends the night (that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe,and apiſh merriment,
Come thither : As ſhe ſpake this,her tongue tript,
For unawares (Come hither)from her ſlipt,
And ſuddenly her former colour chang'd,
And here,and there her eyes through anger rang'd,
And like a Planet moving ſeverall wayes,
At one ſelfe inſtant,ſhe poore ſoule aſſaies,
Loving,not to loye at all,and eyery part
Stroye to reſiſt the motions of her heart,
And hands ſo pure,ſo innocent,nay ſuch,
As might haye made heayen ſtoope to haye a touch,
Did ſhe up hold to Yenus,and againe,
Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtity,but all in vaine,
Cupid beates downe her prayers with his wings,
Her vowes aboye the empty aire he flings,
All deepe enrag'd,his ſinewie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft, that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtroken lookt ſo dolefully,
As made Loye ſigh to ſee his tyranny.
And as ſhe wept her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd.

Then towards the Palace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment, and griefe he flyes,
And to thoſe ſterne Nymphs,humbly made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other, and be bleſt,
But with a gaſtly,dreadfull coun enarce,
Threatning a thouſand Deaths at eyery glance,
They anſwered Loye,nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word, their hate to him was ſuch :
Hearken a while, and I will tell you why.
Heayens winged Herald, loye berne Mercury
The ſelfe-ſame Day that he a ſlecpe had layd,
Inchanted Argus ſpyed a Countrey Mayd,
VVhoſe careleſſe haire, in ſtead of pea les t'adorne it,
Gliſtred with Dew,as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it,
Her breath as fragrant as the Morning Roſe,
Her mind pure, and her tongue untaught to gloſe.
Yet proud ſhe was, (for lofty pride that dwels
In towred Courts, is oft in Shepheards Cels.
And too too well the fayre Vermilion knew,
And ſilyer tincture of her Cheekes, that drew
The loye of every Swaine : On her this god
Enarmoured was, and with his Snaky Rod
Did charme her nimble feet,and made her ſtay,
he while upon the Hillocke downe he lay.
And ſweetly on his pipe beganne to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancy to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt ;
A nd then he woo'd with Riſſes, and at laſt,
As Shepheards doe, her on the ground he layd,
And tumbling on the Graſſe,he often ſtray'd
Beyond the bounds of ſhame, in being bold
To eye thoſe parts which no eye ſhould behold,
And like an inſolent commanding Loyer,

Boaſting his parentage would needs diſcoyer
The way to new Elizium : but ſhe,
Whoſe onely dower was her chaſtity,
Having ſtriy nin vaine,was now about to cry,
And craye the helpe of ſhepheards that were nigh,
Here wi,h he ſtayd his fury,and began,
To giye her leaye to riſe : away ſhe ran,
After went Mercury,who us'd ſuch cunning,
As ſhe to heare his tale let off her'running.
Maids are not wonne by brutiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſure and delight,
And knowing Hermes courted her was glad
That ſhe ſuch loyelineſſe and beauty had,
As could proyoke,his liking,yet was mute,
And neither would deny,nor grant his ſute,
Still vow'd he loye, ſhe wanting no excuſe,
To feede him with delaies,as women uſe,
Or thirſting after im mortality,
All women are ambitious naturally,
In pos'd upon her loyer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe,nor yet ſhe aske,
A draught of flowing Nectar,ſhe requeſted,
Wherewith the Ring of gods and men is feaſted.
Ht ready to accompliſh what ſhe wil'd,
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe Ioves cup fild)
And gaye it to his ſimple ruſticke Loye,
Which being knowne(as what is hid from Iove?)
He inly ſtorm'd,and waxt more furious.
Than for the fire fileht by Prometheus,
And thruſts him down from heayen, he wandring here,
In mournfull tearmnes,with ſad and heayy cheere,
Complaind to Cupid,Cupid for his ſake,
To be reveng'd on Iowe did undertake;

And thoſe on whom heayen,earth,and hell relies,
I meane the adamantine Deſtinies,
He wounds with loye,and forſt them cqually,
To dote upon deceitfull Mercury
They offered him the fatall deacly knife;
That ſheares the ſſender threds of humane life.
At his faire feathered feere the engins laid,
Which th'earth from ugly Chaos den up waid,
Theſe he regarded not,but cid entreat
That Iove, vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olymp's dwell.
They granted what he cray'd,and once againe,
Saturne and Ops began their golden reigne.
Murt her,rape,warre,luſt, and trechery,
Were with Iowe clos'd in Stygian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got,
He rechleſſe of his promiſe did deſpiſe,
The ſoye of th'everlaſting deſtinies.
They ſeeing it,both loye and him abhorr'd,
And Iupiter unto his place reſtor'd.
And that but learning in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heayen gate,
And to the ſeate of Iowe it ſelfe advance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and poyerty ſhould alwaies kiſſe.
And to this day is every ſcholler poore,
Groſſe gold from them runs headlong to the Boore ;
Likewiſe,the angry ſiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelyes on Hermes haye concluded,
That Midas brood ſhall fit in honours chaire,

To which the Muſes ſonnes are onely heire,
And fruitfull VVits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent runne into Regions farre,
And few great Lords in Vertuous Deeds ſhall ioy,
But be ſurpriz'd with eyery gariſh toy,
And ſtill inrich the lofty ſervile Clowne,
VVho with incroching guile,keeps learning downe.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuit no better ſped,
Seeing in their loyes the Fates were iniured.

Y this ſad Hero with loye unacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face,fell downe and fainted :
He kiſt her, and breath'd life into her lips,
Wherewith as one ciſpleas'd away ſhe trips;
Yet as ſhe went full often lookr behinde,
And many poore excuſes did ſh. finde,
To linger by the way,and or ce ſhe ſtaid,
And would haye tuin'd againe,but was affraid,

In offering parley,to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes,and in her idle flight,
Her painted Fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a Novice knew not what ſhe meant :
But ſtay'd and after her a letter ſent :
Which ioy full Hero anſwered in ſuch ſort.
As he had hope to ſcale the beautious fort ,
Wherein the liberall Graces lock their wealth;
And therefore to her Tower he got by ſtealth.
Wide open ſtood the doore,he neede not clime,
And ſhe her ſelfe before the poynred time,
Had ſpread the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome,
And oft lookt out, and mus'd he did not come,
At laſt he came : O who can tell the greeti
Theſe greedy loyers had at their ſirſt meeting :
He askt,ſhe gaye,and nothing was denyed,
Both to each other quickly were affyed.
Looke how their hands,ſo were their hearts united ;
And what he did ſhe willingly requited.
( Sweete are the kiſſes, the embracements ſweet;
When like defires,and like affections meet.
For from the earth to heayen is Cupid rais'd,
Where fancy is in equall ballance pais'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhneſſe ſuddainly repented,
And turn'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented ;
As if her name and honour had beene wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I, and ſhe wiſht,albeit not from her heart,
That he would leaye her Turret and depart.
The mirthfull god of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiye Nymph beguil'd ;
For hitherto he did but fanne the fire,

And kept it downe that it might mount the hi gher.
Now waxt ſhe iealous, leaſt his loye abated,
Fearing her owne thoughts made her to be hated;
Therefore unto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmaſis her body throwes
Vpon his boſome,where with yeelding eyes,
She offers up her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger,if he were diſpleas'd;
O what God would not therewith be appeas'd:
Like ſopr Cocke this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fayour and good will had wonne.
But know you not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haye a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to advance a ſtep,
Moy'd by Loyes force,unto each other leap,
Much more in ſuby cts having intellect,
Some hidden in fluence breeds like effect,
Albeit Leander rude in loye and raw,
Long dallying with Hero nothing ſaw,
That might delight him more,yet he fuſpected,
Some amorous rites or other were neglected :
Therefore unto his body hers he clung,
She,fearing on the ruſhes to be flung,
Striw'd with redoul Ied ſtrength, the more ſhe ſtrived,
The more a gentle pleaſing heate reviyed,
Which taught him all that elder loyers know;
And now the ſaie gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine fearmes (yet cunningly) he cray'd it,
Loye alwaies makes thoſe cloquent that haye it :
She,with a kinde of granting put him by it,
And eyer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,

Like to the tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming laviſh, ſay'd her Maiden-head :
Nere Ring more ſought to keepe his Diadem,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gem.
Aboye our life we loye a ſteadfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of great worth we ſend,
We often kiſſe it often looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gon:
No marvaile then,though Hero would not yeeld:
So ſoone to part from that ſhe dearely held.
Iewels beene loſt are found againe,this never,
This loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for eyer.
Now had the morne eſpy'd her lovers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhee ſtarts,puts on her purple weeds,
And red foranger that he ſtaid ſo long,
All headlong turowes her ſelfe the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbrac't her ſuddainly,tooke leaye,and kiſt.
Long was he taking leaye,and loath to goe,
And kiſt againe as loyers uſe to doe :
Sad Hrre wrung him by the hand and wept,
Saying; Let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore,ſhe turn'd about,
As loath to ſee Leander going out.
And now the Sunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe lovers downewards creepes.
So that in ſilence of the clowdy night,
Though it was morning did he take his ſlight :
But when the ſecret truſty night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habite ſoone reyeal'd,
With Cupids Myrtle was his bonnet crown'd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Wherewith ſhe wreath'd her largely ſpreading haire;

Nor could the youth abſtaine,but he muſt weare
The ſacred Ring wherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious chaſtity ſhe vow'd,
which made his loye through Seſtes to be knowne.
And thence unto Abydos ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſaile,for incorporeall fame,
Whoſe weight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
Is ſwifter than the windes,whoſe tardy plumes
Are reeking water,and dull earthly fumes.
Home when he came,he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled aire thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in a forraiue place, and ſtraight from thence,
Alcides-like by mighty violence,
He would haye chas'd away the ſwelling Maine
That him fronſ her uniuſtly did detaine :
Like as the Sunne in a Diameter
Fires and inflames obiects remoyed farre,
A'd heateth kindly ſhining lat'rally.
So beauty quickly quickens when it's nie;
But being ſeparated and remoyed,
Burnes where it cheriſht,murthers where it loyed :
There fore,eyen as an Index to a booke,
So to his minde was young Leanders looke ;
O none haye power but gods their loye to hide,
A flection by the count'nance is deſcride.
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcoyers,
H nd loye that is conceal'd betraies poore loyers.
His ſecret flame apparently was ſeene,
Leanders father knew where he had beene,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk'd his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparkles new begunne.
But loye reſiſted once,growes paſſionate,
And nothing more than Counſell loyers hate :

For as a hot proud horſe highly diſdaines
To haye his head controll'd,but breakes the raines,
Spits forth the ringled bit,and with his hoyes
Checks the ſubmiſsiye ground : ſo he that loyes,
The more he is reſtrain'd, the worſe he fares,
What is it now but mad Leander dares ?
O Hero,Hero, thus he cry'd full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft,
Where having ſpide her tower,long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'd the narrow toy ling Helleſpont
To part in twaine, that he might come and go;
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no;
With that he ſtript him to the yu'ry skinne,
And crying.Loye, I come, leapt lively in :
Whereat the Saphyr-viſig'd god grew proud,
And made his caprſtig Triton ſound aloud,
Imagining that Ganimed diſpleas'd,
Had left the heayens, therefore on him he ſeazd:
Leander ſtriv'd, the wayes about him wound,
And puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle,and in low corrall groyes,
Sweete ſinging Mermaids ſported with their loyes,
On heapes of heayy gold,and tooke great pleaſure,
To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort the ſhipwracke treaſure:
For here the ſtate ly azure palace ſtood,
Where kingly Neptune and his traine abode,
The luſt y god imbrac't Lim,call'd him Loye,
And ſwore he never ſhould returne to Iove:
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For under Water he was almoſt dead ;
He heay'd him up, and looking on his face,
Beate downe the bold wayes with his triple Mace,
Which mounted up, intending to haye kiſt him.

And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt hin,
Leander being up, beganto ſwim,
And looking backe,ſaw Neptune follow him.
Whereat agaſt, the poore ſoule gan to cry,
O let me viſit Hero ere I dye :
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the ſea ſhould neyer doe him harme,
He claps his plumpts cheekes,with his treſſes plaid,
And ſmiling wantonly his loye bewrayd;
He watcht his armes,and as they open'd wide,
At eyery ſtroake betwixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe,and then run out and dance,
And as he turn'd,caſt many a luſtfull gl ance,
And threw him gawdy toyes to pleaſe his eye
And diye into the water,and there pry
Vpon his breaſt,his thighes,and eyery lim,
An d up agai e,and cloſe beſide him ſwim:
And talke of loye : Leander made reply,
You are deceiv'd, I am no woman I.
Thereat ſmil'd Neptune,and then told a tale,
How that a ſhepheard ſicting in a vale,
Plaid with a boy,ſo lovely,faire,and kinde,
As for his loye both earth and heayen pinde,
That of the cooling riyer durſt not drinke,
Leſt water-Nymphes ſhould pull him from the brinke;
And w hen he ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Goate-footed Satyrs,and upſtarting Fawnes
VVould ſteale him thence,ere halſe his tale was done.
Ay me,Leander cry'd,the enamour'd ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſie bower,
De ſcends upon my radiant Heroes tower.
O that theſe tardy armes of mine were wings .
And as he ſpake upon the wayes he ſprings ;

Neptune was angry that he gaye no eare,
And in his heait reyenging malice beare:
He flung at him his Mace,but as it went,
He cald it in, for loye made him repent.
The Mace returning backe,his owne hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this freſh-bleeding wound Lean der view'd,
His colour wen t'and came,as if he rew'd,
The griefe which Neptune felt.In gentle breaſts,
Relenting thoughts, remorſe and pitty reſts.
And who haye hard hearts and obdurate mindes,
But vicious,hare-brain'd,and illitt'rat Hinds :
The god ſeeing him with pitty to be moyed.
Thereon concluded that he was beloyed.
(Loye is too full of faith,too credulous)
With folly and falſe hope deluding us.
VVherefore Leanders fancy to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſedome to giye much,a gift prevailcs,
When deepe perſwading oratory fails.
By this,Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his weary feete and felt the ſand;
Breathleſſe albeit he were,he reſted not
Till to the ſollitary tower he got :
And knockt, and cald, at which celeſtiall noyſe,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioyes,
Then Nymphes & ſhepheards,when the timbrill rings
Or crooked Dolphin when the ſayler ſings :
She ſtaid not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe to the doore ſhe goes,
Where ſeeing a naked man ſhe ſcrieeht for feare,
Such ſights as this to tender maids are rare,

And ranne into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich Iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide,
Vhto her was he led,or rather drawne,
By whoſe white lims which ſparkled through the lawns
The nearer that he came,the more ſhe fled,
And ſeeking refuge, ſlipt into her bed,
Whereon Leander ſitting. thus began,
Through numming cold,all feeble,faint,and wan,
If not for loye , yet loye for pitty ſake,
Me in thy bed and mayden boſome take,
At leaſt vouchſafe theſe armes ſome little roome,
Who hoping to inibrace thee cheerely ſwome.
This head was beate with many a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt upon thy pillow.
Here with affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her luke-warme place Leander lay,
Whoſe liyely heat like fire from heayen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The dropping houghts of baſe declining ſoule,
Then drery Mars cerowſing Nectar bowles.
His hands he caſt upon her like a ſnare :
She oyercome with ſhame and ſhallow feare,
Like chaſte Diana when Acteon ſpide her.
Being ſuddenly betray'd,div'd downe to hide her,
And as her ſilyer body downeward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne minde thought her ſelfe ſecure,
Orecaſt with dim and darkſome coyerture ;
And ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare,
Flatter,intreate, promiſe, proteſt,and ſweare.
Yet eyer as he greedily iſſayd
To touch thoſe dainties,ſhe the Harpey plaid,
And eyery limbe did as a ſouldier ſtout,

Defend the Fort, and keepe the Foe men out.
For though the riſing Iy'ry mount he ſcal'd
Which is with azure circling lines empal'd,
Much like a globe,(a globe may I terme this,
By which loye ſailes to regions full of blis ?)
Yet there with Syſiphus he toyld in vaine,
Till gentle parley did the truce obtaine.
She trembling ſtroye,this ſtrife of hers (like that
Which made the world)another world begat,
Of unknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not wonne,yet won ſhe was at length,
In ſuch warres women uſe but halfe their ſtrength :
Leander now,like Theban Hercules,
Entied the Orchard of th' Heſperides.
Whoſe fruite none rightly can deſcribe but he,
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree;
Wherein Leander on her quivering breaſt,
Breathleſſe,ſpoke ſomething,and ſigh'd out the reſt,
Which ſo prevail'd,as with ſmall adoe
Inclos'd her in his arnies,and kiſt her too,
And eyery kiſſe to her was as a charme,
A nd to Leander as a freſh alarme.
So that the truce was broke,and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſilly maiden) at his mercy was.
Loye is not full of pitty,(as men ſay)
But deafe and cruell where he meanes to prays
Eyen as a bird,which in our hands we wring,
Forth plungeth,and oft flutters with her wing.
And now we wiſht this night were never done,
And ſigh'd to thinke upon th' approaching ſunne ;
For much it griey'd her that the bright day-light,
Should know the pleaſure of this bleſſed night,

And then like Mars and Ericini diſplayd,
Both in each others armes chaind as they ſaid.
Aguine, ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to hin,who in a moment tooke,
That which ſo long,ſo chearily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth away ſhe would haye crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haye gone
Leaving Leander in the bed alone :
But as her naked feete were whipping out,
He on the ſuddaine cling'd her ſo about,
That Mer-maid like unto the floore ſhe ſlid;
One halfe appear'd, the oth er halfe was,hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe bluſhing ſtood upright,
And from her contenance be bold ye might
A kinde of twi-light breake,which through the haire,
As from an orieut cloud,glimſe here and there.
And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought forth the day before the day was borne.
So Heroes tuddy checke, Herobetraid,
And her all nased to his ſight diſplaid.
VVhence his admiring eyes more pleaſure tooke,
Than Dis, on heapes of gold fixing his looke.
By this Apollos golden harpe began,
To ſouno forth muſiche to the Ocean,
VVhich watchfull Heſperus no ſooner heard,
But he the day bright bearing Car prepar'd,
And ran before as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ugly night,
Till ſhe orecome with anguiſh, ſhame,and rage
Dang'd downe to hell her loath ſome carriage.