Helleſpont guilty of true Loues blood,
In view and oppoſit two Cities ſtood,
Seaborderers,diſioyn'd by Nptunes might ;
The one Abydes, th'other Seſtos hight.
At Seſtos Hero dwelt, Hero the faire.
Whom young Apollo courted for her haire,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outſide of her garments were of Lawne,
The lining, purple ſilke,with guilt ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene,and bordred with a groue)
VVhere Venus in her naked glory ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eyes
Of proud Adonis that before her lyes :
Her kirtle blue, wyhereon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the bloud of wretched Louers ſlaine

Vpon her head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the groud beneath.
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leaues,
Whoſe,work manſhip both man and beaſt deceiues.
Many would praiſe the ſweet ſmell as ſhe paſt,
when 'twas the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for hony, Bees haue ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence, haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her neck,like Diamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloues, for neither Sunne nor wind,
Would burne or parch her hands, but to her mind,
Or warme or coole them : for they tooke delight
To play vpon thoſe hands, they were ſo white?
Buskins of ſhels all ſiluered, vſed ſhee,
And brancht with bluſhing Corall to the knee,
Where Sparo wes pearch't,of hollo w p arle & gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold :
Thoſe with ſweet water oft her hand naid fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherup through the bils.
Some ſay, for her the faireſt Cupid pin'd,
And looking in her face, was ſtrucken blind.
But this is true; ſo like was one the other,
At he imagin'd Hero was his mother :
And oftentimes into her boſome fleww,
About her naked necke his bare armes threwy
alid is chi diſh head ipor her bre,

And with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As Nature wept, thinking ſhe was vndone,
Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her then ſhe left,
And of ſuch wondrous beauty her bereft ;
Therefore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffered wracke,
Since Heroes time,hath halfe the world been blacke.
Amorous Leander, beautifull and young
( Whoſe Tragecie diuine Muſ.eus ſung
Dwelt at Abydus, ſince him dwelt there n
For whom, ſucceeding times may greater f
His dandling treſſes that were neuer ſho,
Had they been cut, and vnto Colchos borne,
Would haue allur'd the ventrous youth o,
To hazzard more then for the goulden fle,
Faire Cynthia wiſht his armes might be h
Griefe makes her pale, becauſe ſhe moue,
His body was as ſtrait as Circes wand
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his ha
Euen as delicious meat is to the the taſte
So was his necke in touching, and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops ſhoulder : Io, Iyee
How ſmooth his breſt was, & hoy, wely,
And whoſe immortall fingers did im prin,
That heauenly path, with many a curious dint,
That runs along his backe ; but m,
Can hardly blazon,

Much leſſe of powerfull gods, let it ſuffice,
That my ſlacke Muſe muſt ſing e Leanders eyes
Theſe orient cheekes and lips, exceeding his
That leapt into he water for a kiſſe
Of his owne ſhadow, and deſpiſing many,
Dyed ere he could enioy the loue of any.
Had vvilde Hy politus Leander ſeene,
Enamoured of his beauty had he beene,
His preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh countrey dwelt,
The barb'rous Thracian ſouldlet mou'd with nought
Was mou'd with him, and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore he was a mayd in mans attire,
For in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke, a ſpeaking eye,
A brow for Loue to banquet royally,
And ſuch as knewy he was a man, vyould ſay,
Leander, thou art made for amorous play,
why art thou not in Loue,and lou'd of all ?
Though thou be faire, yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of vyealthy Seſtes euery yeere,
For his ſake wyhom their Goddeſſe held ſo deare,
Roſe-cheekt Adonis kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandred gueſt,
To meet their loues, ſuch as had none at all,
Came Louers home from this great feſtiuall.
een ſre lieero afirmament,

Gliſtred with breathing ſtars,who, wher they went
Frighted the Melancholly earth which deem'd
Eternall heauen to burne, for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the Sunnes rich Chariot.
But farre aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchanted gazers minde :
For like Sea-nymphs inueigling harmony
So was her beauty to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night-wandring pale and watry ſtarre,
( When yawning Dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the gloomy skie,
Where crown'd with blazing light and Maieſtie
She proudly ſits,) more ouer-rules the flood,
Then ſhee the hearts of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as when gaudy Nimphes purſue the chaſe,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggy-footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heate, gallop amaine,
From ſteepe Pine-bearing mountaines to the Plaine:
So ranne the people forth to gaze vpon her,
And all that view'd her, were enamour'd on her.
And as in fury of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine, or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtroo¬
So at her preſence all ſurpriz'd and tooken,(ken,
Awaite the ſentence of her ſcornefull eyes :
He whom ſhe fauours liues, the other dyes.

There might you ſee one ſigh, another rage
And ſome (their violent paſſions to aſſwage)
Compile ſharpe Satyres, but alas too late,
For faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate,
And many ſeeing great Princes were denyed,
Pin'd as they went, and thinking on her, dyed.
On this feaſt day, O curſed day and hower,
went Hero thorow Seſtos, from her tower
To Venus temple, where vnhappily,
As after chanc'd, they did each other ſpy,
So faire a Church, as this had Venus norie,
The walls were of diſcoloured laſper ſtone,
Wherein was Proteus caru'd, and ouer head
A liuely Vine of greene ſea agget ſpread,
Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung
And with the other, wine from grapes out-wrung,
Of Cryſtall ſhining-faire the pauement was,
The tow ne of Sestos call'd it Venus glaſſe ;
There might you ſee the gods in ſundry ſhapes,
Committing headdy ryots, inceſt, rapes,
For know that vnderneath this radiant flower
Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen tower,
Ioue ſlily ſtealing from his ſiſters bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganimed ;
And for his loue Europa bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rain-bow in a cloud :
uaffing Mars heauing the yron net,

VVhich limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire, to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Siluanus weeping for the louely boy,
That now is turn'd into a Cypres tree.
Vnder whoſe ſhade the Wood-gods loue to be.
And in the midſt a ſiluer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing Turtles blood,
Tayl'd to the ground, vayling her eye-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhe roſe.
Thence flew Loues arrow with thegolden head :
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone-ſtill he ſtood, and euermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his count'nance blazed,
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was ſtrooke:
Such force and vertue hath an amourous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue or hate :
For will in vs is ouer rul'd by Fate.
VVhen two are ſtript long ere the courſe beginne,
VVe wiſh that one ſhould loſe, the other winne.
And one eſpecially doe we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect ;
The reaſon no man knowes : let it ſuffice,
What vye behold is cenſurd by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the loue is ſlight.
Who euer lou'd,that lou'd not at firſt ſight?
He kneel'd, but vnto her deuoutly prayd :
Chaſte Hero, to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſayd ;

Were I the Saint he worſhips,I would heare him :
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words came ſomething neere
He ſtarted vp, ſhe bluſht as one aſham'd,(him.
Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
He toucht her hand, in touching it, ſhe trembled :
Loue'd ep ly grounded hardly is diſſemibled.
Theſe Louers parled by the touch of hands,
True loue is mute and oft amazed ſtands.
(led,
Thus while dumb ſigns their yeelding harts entang
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was fpangled,
And Night deepe drencht in miſtie Acheron,
Heau'd vp her head, and halfe the world vpon,
Breath'd darknes forth, (darke night is Cupids day.)
And now begins Leander to diſplay
Loues holy fire, with words,with ſighes,and teares,
Which like ſ weet Muſicke entred Hero's eares.
And yet at euery word ſhee turn'd aſide,
And alwaies cut him off as he replide.
At laſt, like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With cheerefull hope thus he accoſted her :
Faire creature let me ſpeake without offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts as thy faire lookes doe mine,
Then ſhouldſt thou be his priſoner who is thine.
Be not vnkinde and faire : mis ſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behauiour boyſterous and ruffe.
n n te ere r lere are ere per ge,

God knowes I cannot force loue as you doe.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending,
From Venus altar to your footſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceed her farre,
To whom you offer, and whoſe Nunne you are.
Why ſhould you worſhip her ? her you ſurpaſſe,
As much as ſparkeling Diamonds, flaring glaſſe.
A Diamond ſet in Lead, his worth retaines :
A heau'nly Nymph belou'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiues no blerniſh, but oft times more grace ;
Which makes me hope, although I am but baſe ;
Baſe in reſpect of thee diuine and pure,
Dutifull ſeruice may thy loue procure :
And I in dutie will excell all other,
At thou in beauty doſt exceed Loues mother.
Nor heau'n, nor thou were made to gaze vpon,
As heau'n preſerues all things, ſo ſaue thou one.
A ſtately builded Ship, well rigg'd and rall,
The Ocean maketh more maieſticall :
Why vowſt thou then to liue in Seſtos here,
Who on Loues ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeare:
Like vntun'de golden ſtrings, all women are,
Which long time lie vntouch t, will harſhly iarre.
Veſſels of braſſe, oft handled,brightly ſhine:
What difference betwixt the richeſt Mine,

And baſeſt mould,but vſe? for both, not vs'd,
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abus'd,
VVhen Miſers keepe it ; being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes, themſelues & others do adorne,
Neither themſelues, nor others,if not worne.
Who builds a Palace, and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero, learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh :
Lone women, like to empty houſes periſh ;
Leſſe ſins the poore-rich man that ſtarues himſelfe,
In heaping vp a maſſe of droſsie pelfe,
Then ſuch as you ; his golden earth remaines,
Which af ter his deceaſe ſome other gaines.
But this faire lemme, ſweet in the loſſe alone,
VVhen you fleet hence, can be bequeath'd to none :
Or if it could, downe from the enamel'd skie,
All Heauen would come to claime this legacie ;
And with inteſtine broyles the world deſtroy,
And quite confound Natures ſweet harmony.
VVell therefore by the gods decreed it is,
VVe humane c'eatures ſhould enioy that bliſs ?
One is no number : Maides are nothing then,
Vithout the ſweet ſocietie of Men.
VVilt thou liue ſingle ſtill? one ſhalt thou be,
Though neuer-ſingling Hymen couple thee.

Thinke water farre excels all earthly things,
But they that daily taſte neat Wine, deſpiſe it,
Virgini ie, albeit ſome highly prize it,
Compar'd with marriage, had you try'd them both,
Differs as much, as Wine and water doth.
Baſe boullion for the ſtampes ſake we allow,
Euen ſo for mens impreſsion doe we you,
By which alone, our reuerend Fathers ſay,
Women receiue perfection euery way.
This Idol which you tearme Virginitie,
Is neither Eſſence ſubiect to the eye,
No, nor to any one exterior ſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence.
Nor is't of earth or molde celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.
Of that which hath no being doe not boaſt :
Things that are not at all are neuer loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous :
What vertue is it, that is borne with vs ?
Much leſſe can honour be aſcrib'd thereto,
Honour is purchal'd by the deeds we doe.
Beleeue me Hero, honour is not wonne,
Vntill ſome honourable deed bee done.
Seeke you for chaſtitie, immortall fame,
And know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name.
Whoſe name is it, if ſhe be falſe or not,
So ſhe be faire, but ſome vile tongues will blot ?

But you are faire( aye me)ſo wondrous faire,
So young,ſo gentle,and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke,if thus you liue alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then H ro,hate me not nor from me flie
To follow ſwif ly blaſting infamie :
Perhaps thy ſacred Prieſthood makes thee loath :
Tell me to whom mad'ſt thou that heedleſſe oath ?
To Venus anſwered ſhe : and as ſhe ſpake,
Forth from thoſe two tralucent ciſternes brake
A ſtreame of liquid Pearle,which dowvne her face
Made milk white paths,wheron the gods might trace
To Lues high Court. He thus replide : The rites
In vvhich Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,
Are banquets,Doricke muſicke, midnight reuell,
Playes,Maskes,and all that ſterne age counteth euill.
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thou in vowving chaſtitie haſt ſwvorne,
To rob her name and honour, and thereby
Committ'ſt a ſinne farre worſe then periury :
Euen ſacriledge againſt her Deitie,
Through regulir and formall puritie.
To expiate which ſinne,kiſſe,and ſhake hands,
Such ſacrifice as this Venus demands.
Thereat ſhee ſmil'd, and did deny him ſo,
As put thereby,yet might he hope for moe,
e  ei,

And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon frui leſſe cold Virginitie
The gentle Qurene of Loues ſole enemie,
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nunne,
When Venus ſweet rites are perform'd and done.
Flint-breaſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your Miſtris are at ſtrife.
Loue Hero then and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull y eares with auarice.
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt Corne dyes if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is loſt, too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he vs'd, and many more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded that was wonne before,
Heroes lookes yeelded, but her words made warre,
Women are won, when they begin to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallow'd Cipids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd, the deeper vvas ſhe ſtrooke.
Yet euilly faining anger, ſtroue ſhe ſtill,
And would be thought to grant againſt her will:
So hauing paus'd a while, at laſt ſhe ſaid,
Who taught thee Rethoricke to deceiue a mayde ?
Aye me, ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhor,
And yet I like them for the Orator.

With that Leandtr ſtoopt to haue embrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes aw ay ſhe caſt het,
And thus brſpake him : Gentlen outh, forbeare:
To touch the ſacred garments whichll weare,
Vpon a rocke, and vnderneath a hill,
Farre from the towne ( where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saue that the Sea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends forth a ratling murmure to the land,
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſi ence of the night to viſit vs,
My nrret ſtands, an'd there God knowes I play
With Venus Swannes, and Sparrowes all the day,
A dwarfiſh beldam beares me company,
That hops abont the chamber where I lye,
And ſpends the night' that might be better ſpent)
In vaipe diſcourſe and apiſh meriment,
Come thither : A ſhe ſpake this, her tongue fript,
For vnapvares Cme hit er) from her ſlipt,
And ſodainely her former colour chang'd,
And hene and there her eyes through anger rang'd,
And like a Planet mouing feuerall wayes,
At one ſelfe inſtant,ſſhe poore ſoule aſſayes,
Louing, not to loue at all, and euery part
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her heart,
And hands ſo pure, ſo innocent, nay ſuch,
As might haue made heauen ſtobpe to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vp hold to Henus, and againe,

Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtitie, but all in yaine,
Cupid beates downe her prayers with his wings,
Her vowes ahoue the empry ayre he flings,
All deepe enrag'd, his ſin ſwie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft,that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtroken lookt ſo dolefully,
As made Loue ſigh, to ſee his tytannie,
And as ſhe wept her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her moum'd,
Then toward the Palace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment, and griefe he flies,
And to thoſe ſterne Nymphs,humbly made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other, and be bleſt,
But with a gaſt y, dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouſand deaths at euery glance,
They anſwwered Loue,hor woule vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word, their hate to him was ſuch ;
Hearken a while, ancI will tell you why,
Heauens winged Herald, Ioue-borne Mercury,
The ſelfe-ſame day that be a ſleep had laid
Inchanted Argus ſpyed a countey Maid,
Whoſe careleſſe haire, in ſtead of pearle t'adorne it,
Gliſtred with dew, as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it,
Her breath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure, and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet proud ſhe was, (for lofty pride that dwels
In towred Courts, is oft in Shepheard, cels.

And too too well the faire Vermilion knew,
And ſiluer tincture of her cheeks, that drew
The loue of euery Swaiue : On her this god
Enamoured was and vyith his Snaky rod,
Did charme her nimble feet, and made her ſtay,
The while vpon the hillock e downe he lay,
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancy to aſſay,
Till in his t wining armes he Iockt her faſt ;
And then he woo'd with kiſſes, and at laſt,
As Shepheards doe,her on the ground he laid,
Aud tum bling on the graſſe, he often ſtraid
Beyond the bounds of ſhame, in being bold
To eye thoſe parts which no eye ſhould behold,
And like an inſolent commanding louer,
Boaſting his parertage wyould needs diſcouer
The way to new Eligtum : but ſhe,
Whoſe onely dotyer wwas her Chadilie,
Hauing ſtriu'n in vaine, was no w about to cry,
And craue the he lpe of Shepherds that were ni,
Herewith he ſtay'd his fury and began,
To giue her le ne ro riſe : away ſhee ran,
After wyent Merory, who vs'd ſuch cunning
As ſhe to heare his tale, left off her running.
Ma'ds are not wopne by bruitiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſure and delight,
erowig lerne courted ier,was gliod,

That ſhe ſuch louelineſfe and beauty had,
As could prouoke his liking, yet was mute,
And neither would deny, nor grant his ſute.
Still vow'd he loue,ſhe wanting no excuſe,
To feed him with delayes,as women vſe,
Or thirſting after immortalitie,
All women are ambitious naturally,
Impos'd vpon her louer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe nor yet ſhe aske,
A draught of flowing Nectar, ſhe requeſted,
Wherew ith the Ring of gods and men is feaſted.
He ready to accom pliſh wyhat ſhe vvill'd,
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe, Ioues cup fill'd?
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike Loue,
Which being knowne (as what is hid from loue ?
He inly ſtorm'd, and waxt more furiou:
here, Than for the fire filcht by Prometheus
And thruſts him downe from heauen, he wandring
In mournefull tearmes, with ſad and heauy cheere,
Complain'd to Cupid, Cupid for his ſake
To be reueng'd on Ioue, did vndertake,
And thoſe on whom he iuen,earth, and hell relies,
I meane the admancine Deſtinies,
He vyounds wi h loue,and forſt them equally,
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercury,
They offered him the'd adly fatall knife,
That ſheares the ſlender thteds of humane life.

At his faire feathered feet, the engius laid,
Which th'earth from ougly Chaos den vp-waid,
Theſe he regarded not, but did entreat
That Ioue, Vfurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hent,
And aged Siturne in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he crau'd, and once agai ne,
Saturne and Ops began their golden raigne.
Murder, rape, warre, luſt and treacherie,
Were with Ioue cloſ'd in Stygian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got,
He rechleſſe of his promiſe, did deſpiſe
The loue of th'euerlaſting deſtinies.
They ſeeing it ; both Loue and him abhor'd,
And lupiter vnto his place reſtord.
And that but learning in deſpight of Fate,
will mount aloft, and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeat of Ioue it ſelfe aduance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and pouertie ſhould al waies kiſſe :
And to this day is euery Scholler poore,
Groſſe gold from them runs headlong to the Boore ;
Likewiſe, the angry fiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelues on Hrmes haue concluded,
e iſair brooet hia frin feros aait,

To which the Muſes ſonnes are onely,heire,
And fruitfull wits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent runne into regions farre,
And few great Lords in vertuous deedes ſhall ioy,
Eut be ſurpriz'd with euery gariſh toy,
And ſtill iurich the lofty ſeruile Clowne,
VVho with incroching guile, keeps learning down.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuit no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the.Fates were iniured,

Ythis lad Hero with loue vuacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face, fell downe and fainted :
He kiſt her, and breath'd life into her lips,

Wherewith as one diſpleaſd away ſhe trips
Yet as ſhe vyent, full often lookt behind,
And many poore excuſes did ſhe find,
To linger by the way, and once ſhe ſtayd,
And vyould haue turn'd againe but vyas afrayd,
In offſering parly, to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes, and in her idle flight,
Her painted Fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a Nouice knew not what ſhe meant ;
But ſtay'd, and after her a Letter ſent :
Which ioyfull Hero anſwered in ſuch ſort,
As he had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall Graces lock their wealth ;
And therefore to her tower he got by ſtealth.
VVide open ſtood the doore, he neede not clime ;
And ſhe her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Had ſpred the boord,with roſes ſtro wed the roome,
And oft lookt out, and mus'd he did not come ,
At laſt he came : O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedy Louers had at their firſt meeting ?
He askt,ſhe gaue,and nothing was denyed,
Both to each other quickly were affyed
Looke how their hands,ſo were their hearts vnited,
And what he did, ſhe willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kiſſes, the imbracements ſweet,
Wer lre daſie and ike afteron me:.

For from the earth to heauen, is Cupid raiſ'd,
Where fancy is in equall ballance paiſ'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhnes ſodainly repented,
And turn'd aſide, and to her ſelfe lamented ;
As if her name and honour had been wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I, and ſhe wiſht, albeit not from her heart, -
That he would leaue her turret and depart.
The mirthfull god of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Nymph beguil'd ,
For hitherto he did but fan the fire,
And kept it downe, that it might mount the higher.
Nowy waxt ſhe iealous, leſt his loue abated,
Fearing her owne thoughts made her to be hated ;
Therefore vnto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmaſis her body throes
Vpon his boſome, where with yeelding eyes,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger, if he were diſpleaſ'd ;
O what god would not therewith be appeaſ'd ?
Like Aeſops Cocke, this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good will had wonne ;
But know you not that ereatures wanting fence,
By nature haueſa mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduance a ſtep,

Mou'd by Loues force, vnto each other leap,
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect
Albeit Lean ſer rude in loue, and raw,
Long dallying with Hero nothing ſaw,
That might delight him more, yet he ſuſpected,
Some amorous rites or other were neglected :
Therefore vn o his body, hers he clung,
She, fearing on the Ruſhes to be flung, Cued,
Striu'd vvith redoubled ſtrength, the more ſhe ſtri¬
The more a gentle pleaſing heat reuiued,
Which taught him all that elder louers knowy,
And now the ſame gan ſo to ſcorch and glowy,
As in plaine tearmes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it,
Loue alwayes makes thoſe eloquent that haue it :
She, vvith a kind of granting, put him by it,
And euer as he thought himfelfe moſt nigh it
Like to ihe tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lau'ſh, ſau'd her Maiden-head :
Ne're Ring more ſought to keepe his Diademe,
Than H ro this ineſtim ble gemme.
Aboue our life we loue a ſtedfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of greatwvorth yve ſend,
We often kiſſe it, often looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gon :
No maruell then, though Eha would not yeeld
io ſoone to part from thatſhe dearely held,

Iewyels been loſt are found againe, this neuer,
Tis loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for euer.
Nowy had the morne eſpy'd her louers ſteeds.
VVhereat ſhee ſtarts, puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that hee ſtayd ſo long,
All headlong throwes her ſelfe the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbrac't her ſodainly,tooke leaue,and kiſt.
Long was he taking leaue, and loth to goe,
And kiſt againe as Louers vſe to doe :
Sad Hero vvrung him by the hand and wept,
Saying; Let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore, ſhe turn'd about,
As loth to ſee Leander going out.
And now the ſunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe Louers, downwvards creepes.
So that in ſilence of the clowdy night,
Though it was morning, did he take his flight :
But what the ſecret truſtie night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonnet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Wherwith ſhe wreath'd her largely ſpreading haire.
Nor could the youth abſtaine, but he muſt weare
The ſacred Ring wherewith ſhe was endowy'd,
VVhen firſt religious chaſtitie ſhe vow'.
Which made his loue through Sestes to be knowne,

And thence vnto Abydus ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſayle, for incorporeall Fame,
whoſe weight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
I ſwiſter than the wind, whoſe tardy plumes
Are reeking water, and dull earthly fumes.
Home when he came he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled ayre thruſt from hi: ſphere,
Set in a forren place, and ſtraight from thence,
Acides-like by mighty violence,
He would haue chac'd away the ſwelling Maine
That him from her vniuſtly did detaine :
Like as the Sunne in a Diameter,
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heateth kindly ſhining lat'rally,
So beauty ſweetly quickens when it's nie ;
But being ſeperated and remoued,
Burnes where it cheriſht, murders where it loued :
Therefore, euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was young Leanders looke ;
O none haue power but gods their loue to hide,
Affection by the count'nance is deſcride.
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd, betrayes poore louers.
His ſecret flame apparantly was ſeene,
Leanders father knew where he had been,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk'd his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparkles new begunne.

But loue reſiſted once, growes paſsionate,
And nothing more then counſell louers hate :
For, as a hot proud horſe highly diſdaines
To haue his head control'd, but breakes the raines,
Spits forth the ringled bit, and with his houes
Checkes the ſubmiſsiue ground : ſo he that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd, the worſe he fares
what is it now, but madd Leander dares ?
O Hero, Hero, thus he cry'd full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft,
Where hauing ſpide her tower, long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'd the narrow toiling Helleſpont
To part in twaine, that he might come and go.
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no ;
With that he ſtript him to the yu'ry skin,
And crying, Loue, I come, leapt liuely in :
Whereat the Saphyr-viſag'd god grew proud,
And made his capring Triton ſound aloud,
Imagining that Ganimed diſpleaſ'd,
Had left the heauens, therefore on him he ſeaz'd :
Leander ſtriu'd, the waues about him vyound,
And puld him to the bottome, where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle, and in lowy corrall groues,
Syyet ſinging Mermayds ſported vvith their loues,
On heapes of heauy gold, and tooke great pleaſure,
To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort the ſhipwrackt treaſure :
For here the ſtately azure palace ſtood,

Where Ringly Neptuue and his traine abode,
The luſty god imbrac't him,call'd him Loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to Ioue :
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp, and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple Mace,
which mounted vp, intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares, becauſe they miſt him.
Leander being vp, began to ſwim,
And looking backe, ſaw Neptune follow him.
VVhereat agaſt, the poore ſoule gan to cry.
O let me viſit Hero ere I dye :
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the Sea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He claps his plumpt cheekes, with his treſſes playd,
And ſmiling wantonly, his loue bewrayd ;
He watcht his armes, and as they open'd wide,
At euery ſtroke betwixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe, and then runne out and dance,
And as he turn'd caſt many a luſtfull glance,
And threw him gawdy toyes to pleaſe his eie
And diue into the water, and there prie
Vpon his breſt, his thighes, and euery lim,
And vp againe, and cloſe beſide him ſwim :
And talke of Loue ; Leander made reply
You are deceiu'd, I am no wvoman I.

Thereat ſmil'd Neptune, and then told a tale,
How that a Shepheard ſitting in a vale,
Playd with a boy, ſo louely faire and kind,
As for his loue, both earth and heauen pin'd,
That of the coolir g riuer durſt not drinke,
Leſt water-Nymphs ſhould pul him from the brink;
And when he ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Gote-footed Satyrs, and vpſtarting Fawnes
Would ſteale him thence,ere halfe his tale was done.
Ay me, Leander cry'd, th'enamoured ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſy bower,
Deſcends vpon my radiant Heroes tower.
O that theſe tardy armes of mine were wings :
And as he ſpake, vpon the waues he ſprings ;
Neptune was angry that he gaue no eare,
And in his heart reuenging malice beare :
He flung at him his Mace, but as it went,
He call'd it in, for loue made him repent.
The Mace returning backe, his owne hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it
When this freſh-bleeding wound Leander view'd,
His colour went and came, as if he rew'd
The griefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſt,
Relenting thoughts, remorſe and pitty reſts.
And who haue hard hearts, and obdurate minds,
But vicious, hare-brain'd, and illitt'rat Hinds :
The god ſeeing him with pity to be moued,

Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith, too credulous,
With folly and falſe hope deluding vs.
Wherefore Leanders fancie to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſdome to giue much, a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſwading oratorie failes.
By this, Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his weary feet, and felt the ſand,
Breathleſſe albeit he were, he reſted not
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got :
And knockt, and call'd, at which celeſtiall noyſe,
The longing heart of Here much more ioyes, (rings
Then Nymphes and Shepheards,when the tymbrell
Or crooked Dolphin, when the Sayler ſings :
She ſtayd not for her robes, but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe, to the dore ſhe goes,
Where ſeing a naked man, ſhe ſcriecht for feare ;
Such ſights as this to tender maids are rare,
And ranne into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich lewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
Vnto her was he led, or rather drawne, (lawne
By thofe white lims which ſparkled through the
The neerer that he came, the more ſhe fled,
And ſeeking refuge, ſliptin to her bed,
Whereon Leander ſitting, thus began,
Through numming cold,all feeble, faint and wan,

If not for loue, yet loue for pitty ſake,
Me in thy bed and mayden boſome take,
At leaſt, vouchſafe theſe armes ſome little roome,
Who hoping to imbrace thee, cheerely ſwome.
This head was beat with many a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Herewith affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her lukewarme plaee Leander lay,
Whoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay, and higher ſet
The dropping thoughts of baſe declining ſoules
Then drery Mars carowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare :
She ouercome with ſhame and ſhallow fean,
Like chaſt Diana when Acteon ſpide her,
Being ſodainely betray'd, diu'd downe to hide her,
And as her ſiluer body downeward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſeoure
Orecaſt with dim and darkſome couerture ;
And now ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare.
Flatter, intreat, promiſe, proteſt, and ſweare :
Yet euer as he greedily aſſayd
To touch thoſe dainties, ſhe the Harpey playd,
And euery limme did as a Souldier ſtout,
Defend the Fort, and keepe the Foe men out.
For though the riſing Yu'ry mount he ſcal'd,

Which is with azure circling lines empal'd,
Much like a globe, (a globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſayles to regions fall of blis ?)
Yet there with Lyſiphus he toyld in vaine,
Till gentle parly did the truce obtaine.
She trem bling ſtroue, this ſtrife cf hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat,
Of vnknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not woon, yet woon ſhe was at length :
In ſuch warres,wyomen vſe but halfe their ſtrength,
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entred the Orchard of th' Heſperides.
Whoſe fruit none rightly can deſcribe but he,
That puls of ſhakes it from the golden tree ;
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe, ſpoke ſomething, and ſigh'd out the reſt,
Which ſo preuail'd, as he with ſmall adoe
Inclol'd het in his armes, and kiſt her too,
And euery kifſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme.
So that the truce was broke, and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſilly maiden) at his mercy was.
Loue is not full of pitty (as men ſay)
But deafe and cruell where he meanes to pray.
Euen as a bird, which in our hands we wring,
Forth plungeth, and oft flutters with her wing.

And now ſhe wiſht this night wyere neuer done,
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th' approching ſunne,
For much it grieu'd her that the bright day-light,
Should knoyy the pleaſure of this bleſſed night,
And then like Mars and Eritine diſplayd,
Both in each others armes chain'd as they layd.
Againe,ſhe knewy not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to him, who in a moment tooke
That which ſo long ſo charily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth awvay ſhe would haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone:
But as her naked feet vyere whipping out,
He on the ſodaine cling'd her ſo about
That Meremayd-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
One halfe appear'd, the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe (bluſhing) ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance behold ye might
A kind of twi-light break,which through the haire,
As from an orient cloud,glimſe here and there.
And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought forth the day before the day was borne.
I dy cheeke, Hero betrayd, So HeroI
ked to his ſight diſplayd. Ane t
hiring eyes more pleaſure tooke, Whence ſis
he aps of gold fixing his looke. ſpan Di,o
By this Apolhs golden harpe began,

To ſound foorth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchfull Heſperus no ſooner heard
But he the day bright-bearing Car prepar'd,
And ranne before as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ougly night,
Till ſhe orecome vvith anguiſh, ſhame and rage,
Dang'd downe to hell her lo :hſome carriage.

