N Helleſpont guiltie of True loues blood,
In view and oppoſit two citties ſtood,
Seaborders,diſioin'd by Neptunes might :
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos,Hero dwelt; Hero the faire,
Whom young Apollo courted for her haire,
And offred as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outſide of her garments were of lawne,
The lining, purple ſilke,with guilte ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene,and bordered with a groue,
Where Venus in her naked glory ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eies,
Of proude Adonis that before her lies.

Her kirtle blew,whereon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the blood of wretched Louers ſlaine.
Vpon her head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the ground beneath,
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leaues,
Whoſe workmanſhip both man and beaſt deceaues.
Many would praiſe the ſweete ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When t'was the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for honie,Bees haue ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence,haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her necke,like Diamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloues,for neither ſunne nor winde
Would burne or parch her hands,but to her minde,
Or warme or coole them,for they tooke delite
To play vpon thoſe hands,they were ſo white.
Buskins of ſhels all ſiluered, vſed ſhe,
And brancht with bluſhing corall to the knee ;
Where ſparrowes pearcht,of hollow pearle and gold,
Such as the world would woonder to behold :
Thoſe with ſweete water oft her handmaid fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherupe through the bils.
Some ſay,for her the faireſt Cupid pyn'd,
And looking in her face,was ſtrooken blind.
But this is true,ſo like was one the other,
As he imagyn'd Hero was his mother.

And oftentimes into her boſome flew,
About her naked necke his bare armes threw.
And laid his childiſh head vpon her breſt,
And with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As nature wept,thinking ſhe was vndone ;
Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her than ſhe left,
And of ſuch wondrous beautie her bereft :
Therefore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffred wracke,
Since Heroes time,hath halfe the world been blacke.
Amorous Leander,beautifull and yoong,
(Whoſe tragedie diuine Muſcus ſoong)
Dwelt at Abydus,ſince him,dwelt there none,
For whom ſucceeding times make greater mone.
His dangling treſſes that were neuer ſhorne,
Had they beene cut,and vnto Colchos borne,
Would haue allu'rd the vent'rous youth of Greece,
To hazard more,than for the golden Fleece.
Faire Cynthia wiſht,his armes might be her ſpheare,
Greefe makes her pale,becauſe ſhe mooues not there.
His bodie was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his hand.
Euen as delicious meate is to the taſt,
So was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops ſhoulder,I could tell ye,
How ſmooth his breſt was,and how white his bellie,

And whoſe immortall fingers did imprint,
That heauenly path,with many a curious dint,
That runs along his backe,but my rude pen,
Can hardly blazon forth the loues of men.
Much leſſe of powerfull gods,let it ſuffiſe,
That my ſlacke muſe,ſings of Leanders eies.
Thoſe orient cheekes and lippes,exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kis
Of his owne ſhadow,and deſpiſing many,
Died ere he could enioy the loue of any.
Had wilde Hippolitus Leander ſeene,
Enamoured of his beautie had he beene,
I lis preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh countrie dwelt,
The barbarous Thracian ſouldier moou'd with nought,
Was moou'd with him,and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore he was a maide in mans attire,
For in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke,a ſpeaking eie,
A brow for loue to banquet royallie,
And ſuch as knew he was a man would ſay,
Leander,thou art made for amorous play :
Why art thou not in loue,and lou'd of all ?
Though thou be faire,yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of wealthie Sestos, euery yeare,
(For his ſake whom their goddeſſe held ſo deare,

Roſe-cheekt Adonis) kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandring gueſt,
To meet their loues ; ſuch as had none at all,
Came louers home,from this great feſtiuall.
For euerie ſtreet like to a Firmament
Gliſtered with breathing ſtars,who where they went,
Frighted the mealancholie earth,which deem'd,
Eternall heauen to burne,for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the ſunnes rich chariot.
But far aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchaunted gazers mind,
For like Sea-nimphs inueigling harmony,
So was her beautie to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night wandring pale and watrie ſtarre,
( When yawning dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the glomie skie,
Where crown'd with blazing light and maieſtie,
She proudly ſits) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than ſhe the hearts of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as,when gawdie Nimphs purſue the chace,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggie footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heat,gallop amaine,
From ſteepe Pine-bearing mountains to the plaine :
So ran the people foorth to gaze vpon her,
And all that view'd her,were enamour'd on her.

And as in furle of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtrooke,
So at her preſence all ſurpriſde and tooken,
Await the ſentence of her ſcornefull eies :
He whom ſhe fauours liues, the other dies.
There might you ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome (their violent paſsions to aſſwage)
Compile ſharpe ſatyrs,but alas too late,
For faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate.
And many ſeeing great princes were denied,
Pin'd as they went,and thinking on her died.
On this feaſt day,O curſed day and hower,
Went Hero thorow Sestos,from her tower
To Venus temple,where vnhappilie,
As after chanc'd,they did each other ſpie,
So faire a Church as this,had Venus none,
The wals were of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein was Proteus caru'd,and ouer head
A liuely vine of greene ſea agget ſpread ;
Where by one hand light headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other,wine from grapes out wrung.
Of Chriſtall ſhining faire,the pauement was,
The towne of Sestos,calde it Venus glaſſe,
There might you ſee the gods in ſundrie ſhapes,
Committing headdie ryots,inceſt,rapes :

For know,that vnderneath this radiant flowre,
Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen towre,
Ioue, ſlylie ſtealing from his ſiſters bed,
To dallie with Idalian Ganimed:
And for his loue Europa,bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a clowd,
Blood-quaffing Mars,heauing the yron net,
Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire,to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Syluanus weeping for the louely boy,
That now is turnde into a Cypres tree,
Ander whoſe ſhade the Wood-gods loue to bee,
And in the midſt a ſiluer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing turtles blood,
Taild to the ground,vailing her eie-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhe roſe :
Thence flew Loues arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone ſtill he ſtood,and euermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his countnance blazed,
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was ſtrooke,
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue,or hate,
For will in vs is ouer-rulde by fate.
When two are ſtript long ere the courſe begin,
We wiſh that one ſhould loſe,the other win.

And one eſpeciallie doo we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect,
The reaſon no man knowes,let it ſuffiſe,
What we behold is cenſur'd by our eies.
Where both deliberat,the loue is ſlight,
Who euer lou'd,that lou'd not at firſt ſight?
He kneel'd,but vnto her deuoutly praid;
Chaſt Hero to her ſelfe thus foftly ſaid:
Were I the ſaint hee worſhips,I would heare him,
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words, came ſomewhat neere
(him. He ſtarted vp, ſhe bluſht as one aſham' d ;,
Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
He toucht her hand,in touching it ſhe trembled,
Loue deepely grounded,hardly is diſſembled,
Theſe louers parled by the touch of hands,
True loue is mute,and oft amazed ſtands,
Thus while dumb ſigns their yeelding harts entangled,
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was ſpangled,
And night deepe drencht in myſtie Acheron,
Heau'd vp her head, and halfe the world vpon,
Breath'd darkeneſſe forth (darke night is Cupids day)
And now begins Leander to diſplay
Loues holy fire,with words,with ſighs and teare:
Which like ſweet muſicke entred Heroes eares,
And yet at euerie word ſhee turn'd aſide,
And alwaies cut him off as he replide,

At laſt,like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With chearfull hope thus he accoſted her.
Faire creature,let me ſpeake without offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To leade thy thoughts,as thy faire lookes do mine,
Then ſhouldſt thou bee his priſoner who is thine.
Be not vnkind and faire,miſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behauiour boiſterous and ruffe.
O ſhun me not,but heare me ere you goe,
God knowes I cannot force loue,as you doe.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whofe ſweet perfume deſcending,
From Venus altar to your footſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceed her farre,
To whom you offer,and whoſe Nunne you are,
Why ſhould you worſhip her,her you ſurpaſſe,
As much as ſparkling Diamonds flaring glaſſe.
A Diamond ſet in lead his worth retaines,
A heauenly Nimph,belou'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiues no blemiſh,but oft-times more grace,
Which makes me hope,although I am but baſe,
Baſe in reſpect of thee,diuine and pure,
Dutifull ſeruice may thy loue procure,
And I in dutie will excell all other,
As thou in beautie doeſt exceed loues mother.

Nor heauen,nor thou,were made to gaze vpon,
As heauen preſerues all things,ſo ſaue thou one.
A ſtately builded ſhip,well rig'd and tall,
The Ocean maketh more maieſticall:
Why voweſt thou then to liue in Sestos heere,
Who on Loues ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeere?
Like vntun'd golden ſtrings all women are,
Which long time lie vntoucht,will harſhly iarre.
Veſſels of braſſe oft handled,brightly ſhine,
What difference betwixt the richeſt mine
And baſeſt mold,but vſe ? for both not vſde
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abuſde,
When miſers keep it ; being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes,themſelues and others doe adorne,
Neither themſelues nor others,if not worne.
Who builds a pallace and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero,learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh,
Loue women like to emptie houſes periſh.
Leſſe ſince the poore rich man that ſtarues himſelfe,
In heaping vp a maſſe of droſsie pelfe,
Than ſuch as you : his golden earth remains,
Which after his diſceaſſe ſome other gains.
But this faire iem,ſweet,in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence,can be bequeath'd to none.

Or if it could,downe from th'enameld skie,
All heauen would come to claime this legacie,
And with inteſtine broyles the world deſtroy,
And quite confound natures ſweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that blis.
One is no number,mayds are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſocietie of men.
Wilt thou liue ſingle ſtill? one ſhalt thou bee,
Though neuer-ſingling Hymen couple thee.
Wilde ſauages,that drinke of running ſprings,
Thinke water farre excels all earthly things :
But they that daily taſte neat wine,deſpiſe it.
Virginitie,albeit ſome highly priſe it,
Compar'd with mariage,had you tride them both,
Differs as much,as wine and water doth.
Baſe boullion for the ſtamps ſake we allow,
Euen ſo for mens impreſsion doe we you.
By which alone,our reuerend fathers ſay;
Women receiue perfection euery way.
This idoll which you terme Virginitie,
Is neither eſſence ſubiect to the eie,
No,nor to any one exterior ſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence,
Nor is't of earth or mold celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.

Of that which hath no being,doe not boaſt,
Things that are not at all,are neuer loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous,
What vertue is it,that is borne with vs ?
Much leſſe can honour be aſcrib'd thereto,
Honour is purchas'd by the deedes wee do.
Beleeue me Hero,honour is not wone,
Vntill ſome honourable deed be done.
Seeke you for chaſtitie,immortall fame,
And know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name ?
Whoſe name is it,if ſhe be falſe or not,
So ſhe be faire,but ſome vile toongs will blot ?
But you are faire (aye me) ſo wondrous faire,
So yong, ſo gentle,and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke,if thus you liue alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then Hero hate me not,nor from me flie,
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamie.
Perhaps,thy ſacred Prieſthood makes thee loath,
Tell me,to whom mad'ſt thou that heedleſſe oath ?
To Venus,anſwered ſhee,and as ſhee ſpake,
Foorth from thoſe two tralucent ceſternes brake,
A ſtreame of liquid pearle,which downe her face
Made milk-white paths,wheron the gods might trace
To Ioues high court. Hee thus replide : The rites
In which Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,

Are banquets,Dorick muſicke,midnight-reuell,
Plaies,masks,and all that ſterne age counteth euill.
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thou in vowing chaſtitie,haſt ſworne
To rob her name and honour,and thereby
Commit'ſt a ſinne far worſe than periurie.
Euen ſacrilege againſt her Deitie,
Through regular and formall puritie.
To expiat which ſinne,kiſſe and ſhake hands,
Such ſacrifice as this,Venus demands.
There at ſhe ſmilde,and did denie him ſo,
As put thereby,yet might he hope for mo.
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his ſpeech,
And her in humble maner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold Virginitie,
The gentle queene of Loues ſole enemie.
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nun,
When Venus ſweet rites are perform'd and dun,
Flint-breſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your miſtreſſe are at ſtrife.
Loue Hero then,and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeares with auarice,
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.

The richeſt corne dies,if it be not reapt,
Beautie alone is loſt,too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he vs'd,and many more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded,that was woone before
Heroes lookes yeelded,but her words made warre,
Women are woon when they begin to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallow'd Cupids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd the deeper was ſhe ſtrooke.
Yet euilly faining anger,ſtroue ſhe ſtill,
And would be thought to graunt againſt her will.
So hauing paus'd a while,at laſt ſhee ſaid :
Who taught thee Rhetoricke to deceiue a maid ?
Aye me,ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhor,
And yet I like them for the Orator.
With that Leander ſtoopt,to haue imbrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him. Gentle youth forbeare
To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke,and vnderneath a hill,
Far from the towne (where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saue that the ſea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends foorth a ratling murmure to the land,
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſite vs.)
My turret ſtands,and there God knowes I play
With Venus ſwannes and ſparrowes all the day.

A dwarfiſh beldame beares me companie,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And ſpends the night (that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe,and apiſh merriment.
Come thither ; As ſhe ſpake this,her toong tript,
For vnawares ( Come thither ) from her ſlipt,
And ſodainly her former colour chang'd,
And here and there her eies through anger rang'd.
And like a planet,moouing ſeuerall waies,
At one ſelfe inſtant, ſhe poore ſoule aſſaies,
Louing,not to loue at all,and euerie part,
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her hart.
And hands ſo pure,ſo innocent,nay ſuch,
As might haue made heauen ſtoope to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vphold to Venus,and againe,
Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtitie,but all in vaine,
Cupid beats downe her praiers with his wings,
Her vowes aboue the emptie aire he flings :
All deepe enrag'd,his ſinowie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtrooken,look't ſo dolefully,
As made Loue ſigh, to ſee his tirannie.
And as ſhe wept,her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd.
Then towards the pallace of the deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment and griefe he flies.

And to thoſe ſterne nymphs humblie made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other,and be bleſt.
But with a ghaſtly dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouſand deaths at euery glance,
They anſwered Loue,nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word,their hate to him was ſuch.
Harken a while,and I will tell you why :
Heauens winged herrald, Ioue-borne Mercury,
The ſelfe-ſame day that he aſleep had layd
Inchanted Argus,ſpied a countrie mayd,
Whoſe careleſſe haire,in ſtead of pearle t' adorne it,
Gliſtred with deaw,as one that ſeem'd to skorne it :
Her breath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure,and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet prowd ſhe was,(for loftie pride that dwels
In tow'red courts,is oft in ſheapheards cels.)
And too too well the faire vermillion knew,
And ſiluer tincture of her cheekes, that drew
The loue of euery ſwaine : On her this god
Enamoured was,and with his ſnakie rod,
Did charme her nimble feet,and made her ſtay,
The while vpon a hillock downe he lay,
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancie to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt,
And then he woo'd with kiſſes,and at laſt,

As ſheapheards do,her on the ground he layd,
And tumbling in the graſſe,he often ſtrayd
Beyond the bounds of ſhame,in being bold
To eie thoſe parts,which no eie ſhould behold.
And like an inſolent commanding louer,
Boaſting his parentage,would needs diſcouer
The way to new Eliſium : but ſhe,
Whoſe only dower was her chaſtitie,
Hauing ſtriu'ne in vaine,was now about to crie,
And craue the helpe of ſheapheards that were nie.
Herewith he ſtaid his furie, and began
To giue her leaue to riſe,away ſhe ran,
After went Mercurie,who vſde ſuch cunning,
As ſhe to heare his tale,left off her running.
Maids are not woon by brutiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſures and delight.
And knowing Hermes courted her,was glad
That ſhe ſuch louelineſſe and beautie had,
As could prouoke his liking,yet was mute,
And neither would denie,nor grant his ſute.
Still vowd he loue,ſhe wanting no excuſe
To feed him with delaies,as women vſe :
Or thirſting after immortalitie,
All women are ambitious naturallie,
Impoſde vpon her louer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe,nor yet ſhe aske.

A draught of flowing Nectar ſhe requeſted,
Where with the king of Gods and men is feaſted.
He readie to accompliſh what ſhe wild,
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe,Ioues cup fild,)
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike loue,
Which being knowne ( as what is hid from loue )
He inly ſtorm'd,and waxt more furious,
Than for the fire filcht by Prometheus;
And thruſts him down fro heauen,he wandring heere,
In mournfull tearmes,with ſad and heauie cheere
Complaind to Cupid,Cupid for his ſake,
To be reueng'd on Ioue, did vndertake,
And thoſe on whom heauen,earth,and hell relies,
I meane the Adamantine Deſtinies,
He wounds with loue,and forſt them equallie,
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercurie.
They offred him the deadly fatall knife,
That ſheares the ſlender threads of humane life,
At his faire feathered feet,the engins layd,
Which th'earth from ougly Chaos den vp-wayd:
Theſe he regarded not,but did intreat,
That Ioue,vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he crau'd,and once againe,
Saturne and Ops,began their golden raighe.

Murder,rape,warre,luſt and trecherie,
Were with Ioue clos'd in Stigian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got ;
He reckleſſe of his promiſe,did deſpiſe
The loue of th'euerlaſting Deſtinies.
They ſeeing it,both Loue and him abhor'd,
And Iupiter vnto his place reſtor'd.
And but that Learning,in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeat of Ioue it ſelfe aduance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and Pouertie ſhould alwaies kis.
And to this day is euerie ſcholler poore,
Groſſe gold from them runs headlong to the boore.
Likewiſe the angrie ſiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelues on Hermes,haue concluded
That Midas brood ſhall ſit in Honors chaire,
To which the Muses ſonnes are only heire :
And fruitfull wits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent run into regions farre ;
And few great Lords in vertuous deeds ſhal ioy,
But be ſurpris'd with euery gariſh toy.
And ſtill inrich the loftie ſeruile clowne,
Who with incroching guile,keepes learning downe.

Then muſe not Cupids ſute no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the Fates were iniured.

Y this,ſad Hero,with loue vnacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face,fell downe and fainted.
He kiſt her,and breath'd life into her lips,
Wherewith as one diſpleaſde,away-ſhe trips.
Yet as ſhe went,full often lookt behinde,
And many poore excuſes did ſhe finde,
To linger by the way,and once ſhe ſtaid,
And would haue turnde againe,but was afraid,

In offring parlie,to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes,and in her idle flight.
Her painted fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander there withall.
He being a nouice,knew not what ſhe meant,
But ſtayd,and after her a lettet ſent.
Which ioyfull Heor anſwerd in ſuch ſort,
As he had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall graces lock'd their wealth,
And therefore to her tower he got by ſtealth.
Wide open ſtood the doore,he need not clime;
And ſhe her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Had ſpread the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome,
And oft look'd out,and mus'd he did not come,
At laſt he came,O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedie louers had,at their firſt meeting,
He askt,ſhe gaue,and nothing was denied,
Both to each other quickly were affied.
Looke how their hands,ſo were their hearts vnited,
And what he did,ſhe willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kiſſes,the imbracements ſweet,
When like deſires and affections meet,
For from the earth to heauen,is Cupid raſs'd,
Where fancie is in equall ballan ce ei'd,
Yet ſhe this raſhneſſe ſodainly repented,
And tur'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented.

As if her name and honor had been wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I,and ſhee wiſht,albeit not from her hart,
That he would leaue her turret and depart.
The mirthfull God of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Nymph beguil'd.
For hitherto hee did but fan the fier,
And kept it downe that it might mount the hier.
Now waxt ſhe iealous,leaſt his loue abated,
Fearing,her owne thoughts made her to be hated.
Therefore vnto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmacis,her body throes
Vpon his boſome,where with yeelding eyes,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice.
To ſlake his anger,if he were diſpleas'd,
O what god would not therewith be appeas'd ?
Like Æſops cocke,this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good will had wone.
But know you not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haue a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduaunce a ſtep,
to ech other lep ? Mou'd by Loeo o ent t eo r e e
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect.

Albeit Leander rude in loue,and raw,
Long dallying with Hero, nothing ſaw
That might delight him more,yet he ſuſpected
Some amorous rites or other were neglected:
Therefore vnto his bodie,hirs he clung,
She,fearing on the ruſhes to be flung,
Striu'd with redoubled ſtrength,the more ſhe ſtriued,
The more a gentle pleaſing heat reuiued,
Which taught him all that elder louers know,
And now the ſame gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine termes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it.
Loue alwaies makes thoſe eloquent that haue it.
Shee,with a kind of graunting,put him by it,
And euer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,
Like to the tree of T antalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lauiſh,ſau'de her maydenhead.
Ne're king more ſought to keepe his diademe,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gemme.
Aboue our life we loue a ſtedfaſt frend,
Yet when a token of great worth we ſend,
We often kiſſe it,often looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gon :
No maruell then,though Hero would not yeeld
So ſoone to part from that ſhe deerely held.
Iewels being loſt are found againe,this neuer,
Tis loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for euer.

Now ha d the morne eſpy'de her louers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhe ſtarts,puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that he ſtayd ſo long,
All headlong throwes her ſelfe the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbraſt her ſodainly,tooke leaue,and kiſt,
Long was he taking leaue,and loath to go,
And kiſt againe,as louers vſe to do,
Sad Hero wroong him by the hand,and wept,
Saying,let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore,ſhe turnd about
As loath to ſee Leander going out.
And now the ſunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe louers,downeward creepes.
So that in ſilence of the cloudie night,
Though it was morning,did he take his flight.
But what the ſecret truſtie night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Wherewith ſhe wreth'd her largely ſpreading heare,
Nor could the youth abſtaine,but he muſt weare
The ſacred ring wherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious chaſtitie ſhe vow'd :
Which made his loue through Sestos to be knowne,
And thence vnto Abydus ſooner blowne,

Than he could ſaile,for incorporall Fame,
Whoſe waight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
Is ſwifter than the wind,whoſe tardie plumes,
Are reeking water,and dull earthlie fumes.
Home when he came,he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled aire thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in a forren place,and ſtraight from thence,
Alcides like,by mightie violence,
He would haue chac'd away the ſwelling maine,
That him from her vniuſtly did deataine.
Like as the ſunne in a Dyameter,
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heateth kindly,ſhining lat'rally ;
So beautie,ſweetly quickens when t'is ny,
But being ſeparated and remooued,
Burnes where it cheriſht,murdrs where it loued.
Therefore euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was yoong Leanders looke,
O none but gods haue power their loue to hide,
Affection by the count'nance is deſcride.
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd betraies poore louers.
His ſecret name apparantly was ſeene,
Leanders Father knew where he had beene,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk't his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparckles new begonne.

But loue reſiſted once,growes paſſionate,
And nothing more than counſeile louers hate.
For as a hote prowd horſe highly diſdaines,
To haue his head control'd,but breakes the raines,
Spits foorth the ringled bit,and with his houes,
Checkes the ſubmiſsiue ground : ſo hee that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd,the woorſe he fares,
What is it now,but mad Leander dares ?
O Hero,Hero,thus he cry'de full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft.
Where hauing ſpy'de her tower,long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'd the narrow toyling Helleſpont,
To part in twaine,that hee might come and go,
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no.
With that hee ſtript him to the yu'rie skin,
And crying,Loue I come,leapt liuely in.
Whereat the ſaphir viſag'd god grew prowd,
And made his capring Triton ſound alowd,
Imagining,that Ganimed diſpleas'd,
Had left the heauens,therefore on him he ſeaz'd.
Leander ſtriu'd,the waues about him wound,
And puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle,and in low corrall groues
Sweet ſinging Meremaids, ſported with their loues
On heapes of heauie gold,and tooke great pleaſure,
ke treaſure. ipwi To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort, t he aerare.

For here the ſtately azure pallace ſtood,
Where kingly Neptune and his traine abode,
The luſtie god imbra'ſt him,cald him loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to Ioue.
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp,and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple mace,
Which mounted vp,intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt him.
Leander being vp began to ſwim,
And looking backe,ſaw Neptune follow him.
Whereatagaſt,the poore ſoule ganto crie,
O let mee viſit Hero ere I die.
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the ſea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He clapt his plumpe cheekes,with his treſſes playd,
And ſmiling wantonly,his loue bewrayd.
He watcht his armes,and as they opend wide,
At euery ſtroke,betwixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe,and then run out and daunce,
And as he turnde,caſt many a luſtfull glance,
And threw him gawdie toies to pleaſe his eie,
And diue into the water,and there prie
Vpon his breſt,his thighes,and euerie lim,
And vp againe,and cloſe beſide him ſwim.

And talke of loue : Leander made replie,
You are decau'd,I am no woman I,
Thereat ſmilde Neptune,and then told a tale,
How that a ſheapheard ſitting in a vale,
Playd with a boy ſo faire and kind,
As for his loue,both earth and heauen pyn'd ;
That of the cooling riuer durſt not drinke,
Leaſt water-nymphs ſhould pull him from the brinke.
And when hee ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Gote-footed Satyrs,and vp-ſtaring Fawnes,
Would ſteale him thence. Ere halfe this tale was done,
Aye me,Leander oryde,th'enamoured ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſie bower,
Deſcends vpon my raiant Herdes tower.
O that theſetardiearmes of mine were wi ngs,
And as he ſpake,vpon the waues he ſprings.
Neptune was angrie that hee gaue no eare,
And in his heart reuenging malice bare :
He flung at him his mace,but as it went,
He cald it in,for loue made him repent.
The mace returning backe,his owne hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this freſh bleeding wound Leander viewd,
His colour went and came,as if he rewd.
The greefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſts,
Relenting thoughts,remorſe and pittie reſts.

Trouping together,made her wonder why
She ſhould not leaue her bed,and to the Temple ?
Her health ſayd ſhe muſt liue ; her ſex diſſemble.
She viewd Leanders place,and wiſht he were
Turnd to his place,ſo his place were Leander.
Aye me(ſayd ſhe) that loues ſweet life and ſence
Should doe it harme ! my loue had not gone hence,
Had he been like his place. O bleſſed place,
Image of Conſtancie.Thus my loues grace
Parts no where but it leaues ſome thing behinde
Worth obſeruation : he renowmes his kinde.
His motion is like heauens Orbiculer :
For where he once is,he is euer there.
This place was mine : Leander now t'is thine ;
Thou being my ſelfe,then it is double mine :
Mine,and Leanders mine,Leanders mine.
O ſee what wealth it yeelds me,nay yeelds him:
For I am in it,he for me doth ſwim.
Rich,fruitfull loue,that doubling ſelfe eſtates
Elixer-like contracts,though ſeparates.
Deare place I kiſſe thee,and doe welcome thee,
As from Leander euer ſent to mee.

Ow from Leanders place ſhe roſe,and found
Her haire and rent robe ſcattred on the ground:

Which taking vp,ſhe euery peece did lay
Vpon an Altar ; where in youth of day
She vſde t'exhibite priuate Sacrifice :
Thoſe would ſhe offer to the Deities
Of her faire Goddeſſe,and her powerfull ſon,
As relicks of her late-felt paſſion :
And in that holy ſort ſhe vowd to end them,
In hope her violent fancies that did rend them,
Would as quite fade in her loues holy fire,
As they ſhould in the flames ſhe ment t'inſpire.
Then put ſhe on all her religious weedes,
That deckt her in her ſecret ſacred deedes :
A crowne of Iſickles,that ſunne nor fire
Could euer melt,and figur'd chaſt deſire.
A golden ſtar ſhinde in her naked breaſt,
In honour of the Queene-light of the Eaſt.
In her right hand ſhe held a ſiluer wand,
On whoſe bright top Peristera did ſtand,
Who was a Nymph;but now tranſformd a Doue,
And in her life was deare in Venus loue :
And for her ſake ſhe euer ſince that time, (blew clime.
Chuſde Doues to draw her Coach through heauens
Her plentious haire in curled billowes ſwims
On her bright ſhoulder : her harmonious lims
Suſtainde no more but a moſt ſubtile vaile
m as it durſt not afſaile That hu n t a t t t t afie,

Their different concord : for the weakeſt ayre
Could raiſe it ſwelling from her bewties fayre :
Nor did it couer,but adumbrate onelie
Her moſt heart-piercing parts, that a bleſt eie
Might ſee (as it did ſhadow) fearfullie,
All that all-loue-deſeruing Paradiſe:
It was as blew as the moſt freezing skies
Neere the Seas hew,for thence her Goddeſſe came :
On it a skarfe ſhe wore of wondrous frame;
In midſt whereof ſhe wrought a virgins face,
From whoſe each cheeke a firie bluſh did chace
Two crimſon flames, that did two waies extend,
Spreading the ample skarfe to either end,
Which figur'd the diuiſion of her minde,
Whiles yet ſhe reſted baſhfully inclinde,
And ſtood not reſolute to wed Leander.
This ſeru'd her white neck for a purple ſphere,
And caſt it ſelfe at full breadth downe her back.
There (ſince the firſt breath that begun the wrack
Of her free quiet from Leanders lips)
She wrought a Sea in one flame full of ſhips:
But that one ſhip where all her wealth did paſſe
(Like ſimple marchants goods) Leander was :
For in that Sea ſhe naked figured him ;
Her diuing needle taught him how to ſwim,
And to each thred did ſuch reſemblance giue,

For ioy to be ſo like him, it did liue.
Things ſenceles liue by art,and rationall die,
By rude contempt of art and industrie.
Scarce could ſhe work but in her ſtrength of thought,
She feard ſhe prickt Leander as ſhe wrought :
And oft would ſhrieke ſo, that her Guardian frighted,
Would ſtaring haſte, as with ſome miſchiefe cited.
They double life that dead things griefs ſustayne :
They killthat feele not their friends liuing payne.
Sometimes ſhe feard he ſought her infamie,
And then as ſhe was working of his eie,
She thought to pricke it out to quench her ill:
But as ſhe prickt,it grew more perfect ſtill.
Trifling attempts no ſerious acts aduance ;
The fire of loue is blowne by dalliance.
In working his fayre neck ſhe did ſo grace it,
She ſtill was working her owne armes t'imbrace it:
That, and his ſhoulders,and his hands were ſeene
Aboue the ſtreame,and with a pure Sea greene
She did ſo queintly ſhadow euery lim,
All might be ſeene beneath the waues to ſwim.
ide In this conceited skarfe ſhe wroughitid.
A Moone in change,and ſhooting ſtars did glide
In number after her with bloodie beames,
Which figur'd her affects in their extreames,
Purſuing Nature in her Cynthian bodie,

And did her thoughts running on change implie:
For maids take more delights when they prepare
And thinke of wiues ſtates,than when wiues they are.
Beneath all these ſhe wrought a Fiſherman
Drawing his nets from forth that Ocean ;
Who drew ſo hard ye might diſcouer well,
The toughned ſinewes in his neck did ſwell :
His inward ſtraines draue out his blood-ſhot eyes,
And ſprings of ſweat did in his forehead riſe :
Yet was of nought but of a Serpent ſped,
That in his boſome flew and ſtung him dead,
And this by fate into her minde w aes, ent,
Not wrought by meere inſtinct of her intent.
At the skarfs other end her hand did frame,
Neere the forkt point of the deuided flame,
A countrie virgin keeping of a Vinc,
Who did of hollow bulruſhes combine
Snares for the ſtubble-louing Graſhopper
And by her lay her skrip that nouriſht her.
Within a myrtle ſhade ſhe ſate and ſung,
And tuſts of wauing reedes about her ſprung:
Where lurkt two Foxes,that while ſhe applide
Her trifling ſnares,their theeueries did deuide :
One to the vine,another to her skrip,
That ſhe did negligently ouerſlip :
By which her fruitfull vine and holeſome fare,

She ſuffred ſpoyld to make a childiſh ſhare.
Theſe omenous fancies did her ſoule expreſſe,
And euery finger made a Propheteſſe,
To ſhew what death was hid in loues diſguife,
And make her iudgement conquer deſtinies.
O what ſweet formes fayre Ladies ſoules doe ſhrowd,
Were they made ſeene & forced through their blood,
If through their beauties like rich work through lawn,
They would ſet forth their minds with vertues drawn,
In letting graces from their fingers flie,
To ſtill their yas thoughts with induſtrie :
That their plied wits in numbred ſilks might ſing
Paſsions huge conqueſt, and their needels leading
Affection priſoner through their own-built citties,
Pinniond with ſtories and Arachnean ditties.
Proceed we now with Heros ſacrifice ;
She odours burnd,and from their ſmoke did riſe
Vnſauorie fumes, that ayre with plagues inſpired,
And then the conſecrated ſticks ſhe fired.
On whoſe pale flame an angrie ſpirit flew,
And beate it downe ſtill as it vpward grew.
The virgin Tapers that on th'altar ſtood,
When ſhe inflam'd them burnd as red as blood :
All ſad oſtents of that too neere ſucceſſe,
That made ſuch mouing beauties motionleſſe.
Then Hero wept ; but her affrighted eyes

She quickly wreſted from the ſacrinice :
Shut then,and inwards for Leander lookt,
Searcht her ſoft boſome,and from thence ſhe pluckt
His louely picture : which when ſhe had viewd,
Her beauties were with all loues ioyes renewd.
The odors ſweethed,and the fires burnd cleere,
Leanders forme left no ill obiect there.
Such was his beautie that the force of light,
Whoſe knowledge teacheth wonders infinite.
The ſtrength of number and proportion,
Nature had plaſte in it to make it knowne.
Art was her danghter,and what humane wits
For ſtudie loſt,intombd in droſsie ſpirits.
After this accident(which for her glorie
Hero could not but make a hiſtorie)
Th'inhabitants of Sestus,and Abydus,
Did euery yeare with feaſts propitious,
To fayre Leanders picture ſacrifice.
And they were perſons of eſpeciall prize
That were allowd it,as an ornament
T'inrich their houſes ; for the continent
Of the ſtrange vertues all approu'd it held :
For euen the very looke of it repeld
All blaſtings,witchcrafts,and the ſtrifes of nature
In thoſe diſeaſes that no hearbs could cure.
The woolfie ſting of Auarice it would pull,

And who haue hard hearts,and obdurat minds,
But vicious,harebraind,and illit'rat hinds ?
The god ſeeing him with pittie to be moued,
Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith,too credulous,
With follie and falſe hope deluding vs.)
Wherefore Leanders fancie to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſedome to giue much,a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſwading Oratorie failes,
By this Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his wearie feet,and felt the fand
Breathleſſe albeit he were,he reſted not,
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got.
And knockt and cald,at which celeſtiall noiſe,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioies
Then nymphs & ſheapheards,when the timbrell rings
Or crooked Dolphin when the ſailer ſings ;
She ſtayd not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe,to the dore ſhe goes.
Where ſeeing a naked man,ſhe ſcriecht for feare,
Such ſights as this,to tender maids are rare.
And ran in to the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
Vnto her was he led, or rather drawne,(lawne.
By thoſe white limmes, which ſparckled through the

The neerer that he came,the more ſhe fled,
And ſeeking refuge,ſlipt into her bed.
Whereon Leander ſitting,thus began,
Though numming cold,all feeble, faint and wan :
If not for loue,yet loue for pittie ſake,
Me in thy bed and maiden boſome take,
At leaſt vouchſafe theſe armes ſome little roome,
Who hoping to imbrace thee,cherely ſwoome.
This head was beat with manie a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Herewith affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her luke-warme place Leander lay.
Whoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The drooping thoughts of baſe declining ſoules,
Then drerie Mars,carowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare,
She ouercome with ſhame and ſallow feare,
Like chaſt Diana,when Acteon ſpyde her,
Being ſodainly betraide,dyu'd downe to hide her.
And as her ſiluer body downeward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſecure,
O'recaſt with dim and darkſome couerture.
And now ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare,
Flatter,intreat,promiſe,proteſt and ſweare,

Yet euer as he greedily aſſayd,
To touch thoſe dainties,ſhe the Harpey playd,
And euery lim did as a ſoldier ſtout,
Defend the fort,and keep the foe-man out.
For though the riſing yu'rie mount he ſcal'd,
Which is with azure circling liues empal'd,
Much like a globe,(a globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſailes to regions ful of blis,)
Yet there with Syſiphus he toyld in vaine,
Till gentle parlie did the truce obtaine.
She trembling ſtroue,this ſtrife of hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat,
Of vnknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not woon,yet woon ſhe was at length,
In ſuch warres women vſe but halfe their ſtrength.
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entred the orchard of Th'eſperides.
Whoſe fruit none rightly can deſcribe,but hee
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree :
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe ſpoke ſome things,and ſigh'd out the reſt ;
Which ſo preuail'd,as he with ſmall ado,
Inclos'd her in his armes and kiſt her to.
And euerie kiſſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme.

So that the truce was broke,and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſillie maiden) at his mercie was.
Loue is not full of pittie(as men ſay)
But deaffe and cruell,where he meanes to pray.
Euen as a bird,which in our hands we wring,
Fourth plungeth,and oft flutters with her wing.
And now ſhe wiſht this night were neuer done.
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th' approching ſunne,
For much it greeu'd her that the bright day-light,
Should know the pleaſure of this bleſſed night.
And then like Mars and Ericine diſplayd,
Both in each others armes chaind as they layd.
Againe ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to him who in a moment tooke,
That which ſo long ſo charily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth away ſhe would haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were whipping out,
He on the ſuddaine clingd her ſo about,
That Meremaid-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
And halfe appear'd the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe bluſhing ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance behold ye might,
A kind of twilight breake,which through the heare,
As from an orient cloud,glymſe here and there.

And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought foorth the day before the day was borne.
So Heroes ruddie cheeke Hero betrayd.
And her all naked to his ſight diſplayd
Whence his admiring eyes more pleaſure tooke,
Than Dis, on heapes of gold fixing his looke.
By this Apollos golden harpe began,
To ſound foorth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchfull Heſperus no ſooner heard,
But he the day bright-bearing Car prepar'd.
And ran before,as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ougly night,
Till ſhe o'recome with anguiſh,ſhame,and rage,
Hurld downe to hell her loathſome carriage.


