N Helleſpont guiltie of true loues blood,
In view and oppoſit two citties ſtood,
Seaborders,diſioin'd by Neptunes might:
The one Abydos,the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos, Hero dwelt; Hero the faire,
Whom young Appollo courted for her haire,
And offred as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outſide of her garments were of lawne,
The lining,purple ſilke,with guilte ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene, and bordered with a groue,
Where Venus in her naked glorie ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eies,
Of proude Adonis that before her lies .
Her kirtle blew,whereon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the blood of wretched louers ſlaine.

Vpon her head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her vaile reacht to the ground beneath.
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and leaues,
Whoſe workmanſhip both man and beaſt deceiues,
Many would praiſe the ſweete ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When t'was the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for honie,Bees haue ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence,haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
Which lightned by her necke, like Diamonds ſhone.
She ware no gloues,for neither ſunne nor winde
Would burne or parch her hands,but to her minde,
Or warme or coole them, for they tooke delite
To play vpon thoſe hands,they were ſo white.
Buskins of ſhels all ſiluered, vſed ſhe,
And brancht with bluſhing corall to the knee ;
Where ſparrowes pearcht, of hollow pearle and gold,
Such as the world would woonder to behold :
Thoſe with ſweete water oft her handmaid fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherupe through the bils.
Some ſay,for her the faireſt Cupid pyn'd,
And looking in her face,was ſtroken blind.
But this is true,ſo like was one the other,
As he imagin'd Hero was his mother.
And oftentimes into her boſome flew,
About her naked necke his bare armes threw,
And laid his childiſh head vpon her breſt,

And with ſtill panting rocke,there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As nature wept,thinking ſhe was vndone ;
Becauſe ſhe tooke more from her than ſhe left,
And of ſuch wondrous beautie her bereft :
Therefore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffred wracke,
Since Heroes time,hath halfe the world been black.
Amorous Lcander,beautifull and yo ong
(Whoſe tragedie diuine Muſaus ſoong)
Dwelt at Abydus ſince him,dwelt there none,
For whom ſucceeding times may greater mone.
His dangling treſſes that were neuer ſhorne,
Had they been cut,and vnto Colchos borne
Would haue allur'd the vent rous youth of Greece,
To hazard more, than for the golden Fleece.
Faire Cynthia wiſht,his armes might be her ſpheare,
Greefe makes her pale,becauſe ſhe mooues not there.
His bodie was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his hand.
Euen as delicious meate is to the taſt,
So was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops ſhoulder,I could tell ye,
How ſmooth his breſt was,and how white his bellie,
And whoſe immortall fingers did imprint,
That heauenly path,with many a curious dint,
That runs along his backe,but my rude pen,
Can hardly blazon forth the loues of men.

Much leſſe of powerfull gods,let it ſuffiſe,
That my ſlacke muſe,ſings of Leanders eies.
Thoſe orient cheekes and lippes,exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kis
Of his owne ſhadow, and deſpiſing many
Died ere he could enioy the loue of any.
Had wilde Hippolitus Leander ſeene,
Enamoure I of his beautie had he beene,
His preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh countrie dwelt,
The barbarous Thracian ſouldier moou'd with nought,
Was nioou'd with him,and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore he was a maide in mans attire,
For in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke, a ſpeaking eie,
A brow for loue to banquet royally,
And ſuch as knew he was a man would ſay,
Leander, thou art made for amorous play :
Why art thou not in loue, and lou'd of all ?
Though thou be faire,yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of wealthie Sestos,euery yeare,
(For his ſake whom their goddeſſe held ſo deare,
Roſe-checkt Adonis ) kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandring gueſt,
To meet their loues ſuch as had none at all,
Came louers home, from this great feſtiuall.
For euerie ſtreet like to a firmament

Gliſtered with breathing ſtars,who where they went,
Frighted the melancholie earth, which deem'd,
Eternall heauen to burne, for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the ſunnes rich chariot.
But farre aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchaunted gazers mind,
For like Sea-nimphs inueigling harmonie,
So was her beautie to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night wandring pale and watrie ſtarre,
( When yawning dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the gloomie skie ,
Where crown'd with blazing light and maieſtie,
She proudly ſits ) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than ſhe the hearts of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as, when gawdie Nimphs purſue the chaſe,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggie footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heat, gallop amaine,
From ſteepe Pine-bearing mountaines to the plaine :
So ran the people foorth to gaze vpon her,
And all that view'd her,were enamour'd on her.
And as in furie of a dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtrooken,
So at her preſence all ſurpriſde and tooken,
Await the ſentence of her ſcornefull eies :
He whom ſhe fauours liues, the other dies.

There might you ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome (their violent paſſions to aſſwage)
Compile ſharpe Satyrs,but alas too late,
For faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate.
And many ſeeing great Princes were denied,
Piu'd as they went,and thinking on her died.
On this feaſt day,O curſed day and hower,
Went Hero thorow Sestos,from her tower
To Venus temple,where vnhappily,
As after chane'd,they did each other ſpie,
So faire a Church as this had Venus none,
The wals were of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein was Proteus caru'd, and ouer head
A liuely vine of greene ſea agget ſpread ;
Where by one hand light headed Bachus hung
And with the other,wine from grapes out wrung.
Of Chriſtall ſhining faire,the pauement was,
The towne of Seſtos, calde it Venus glaſſe,
There might you ſee the gods in ſundrie ſhapes,
Committing headdie ryots,inceſt,rapes :
For know, that vnderneath this radiant flowre,
Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen towre,
Icue, ſlylie ſtealing from his ſiſters bed,
To dallie with Idalian Ganimed :
And for his loue Europa, bellowing lowd,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a clowd,
Blood-quaffing Mars,heauing the yron net,

Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire,to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Syluanus weeping for the louely boy,
That now is turnde into a Cypres tree,
Vnder whoſe ſhade the Wood gods loue to bee.
And in the midſt a ſiluer altar ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing turtles blood,
Taild to the ground, vailing her eie-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhe roſe :
Thence flew Loues arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone ſtili he ſtood, and cuermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his countnance blazed,
Relenting Hero s gentle heart was ſtrooke
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue,or hate,
For will in vs is ouer-rulde by fate.
When two are ſtript long ere the courſe begin,
We wiſh that one ſhould loſe,the other win.
And one eſpecially doo we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect,
The reaſon no man knowes, let it ſuffiſe,
What we behold is cenſur'd by our eies.
Where both deliberat,the loue is ſlight,
Who euer lou'd,that lou'd not at firſt ſight?
He kneel'd but vnto her deuoutly praid :
Chaſt Hero to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſaid :

Were I the ſaint hee worſhips, I would heare him,
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words,came ſomw hat neere him.
He ſtarted vp, ſhe bluſht as one aſham'de ;
Wherewith Leander much more wore was inflam'de.
He toucht her hand, in touching it ſhe trembled,
Loue deepely grounaed, hardly is diſſembled,
Theſe louers parled by the touch of hands,
True loue is mute, and oft amazed ſtands,
Thus while dumb ſigns their yeelding harts entangled,
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was ſpangled,
And night deepe drencht in myſtie Acheron,
Heau'd vp her head, and halfe the world vpon,
Breath'd darkneſſe forth ( darke night is Cupids day)
And now begins Leander to diſplay,
Loues holy fire, with words, with ſighs and teares,
Which like ſweet muſicke entred Heroes eares,
And yet at euerie word ſhee turn'd aſide,
And alwaies cut him off as he replide,
At laſt, like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With chearfull hope thus he accoſted her.
Faire creature,let me ſpeake without offence,
Twould my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts,as thy faire lookes do mine,
Then ſhouldſt thou bee his priſoner who is thine.
Be not vnkind and faire, miſhapen ſtuffe
Are of Lehauiour boiſterous and ruffe.
O ſhun me not,but here me ere you goe,

God knowes I cannot force loue, as you doe.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending
From Venus altar to your footſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceed her farre,
To whom you offer, and whoſe Nunne you are,
Why ſhould you worſhip her, her you ſurpaſſe,
As much as ſparkling Diamonds flaring glaſſe.
A Diamond ſet in lead his worth retaines, Y
A heauenly Nimph,belou'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiues no blemiſh,but oft-times more grace,
Which makes me hope, although I am but baſe,
Baſe in reſpect of thee,diuine and pure,
Dutifull ſeruice may thy loue procure,
And I in dutie will excell all other,
As thou in beautie doeſt exceed loues mother.
Nor heauen,nor thou,wre made to gaze vpon,
As heauen preſerues all tngs, ſo ſaue thou one.
A ſtately builded ſhip,well rig'd and tall,
The Ocean maketh more maieſticall :
Why voweſt thou then to liue in Seſtos heere,
Who on Loues ſeas more glorious wouldſt appeare ?
Like vntun'd golden ſtrings all women are, Y
Which long time lie vntoucht,will harſhly iarre.
Veſſels of braſſe oft handled,brightly ſhine,
What difference betwixt the richeſt mine

And baſeſt mold,but vſe ? for both not vſde,
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abuſde,
When miſers keepe it ; being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes,themſelues and others doe adorne,
Neither them ſelues nor others, if not worne.
Who builds a pallace and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero, learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh,
Loue women like to emptie houſes periſh.
Leſſe ſince the poore rich man that ſtarues himſelfe,
In heaping vp a maſſe of droſſie pelfe,
Than ſuch as you : his golden earth remains.
Which after his diſceaſſe ſome other gains.
But this faire iem, ſweet, in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence,can be bequeath'd to none.
Or if it could,downe from th'enameld skie,
All heauen would come to claime this legacie,
And with inteſtine broyles the world deſtroy,
And quite confound natures ſweet harmonie.
Wel therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that blis.
One is no number,maids are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſocietie of men.
Wilt thou liue ſingle ſtill? one ſhalt thou bee,
Though neuer-ſingling Hymen couple thee.
Wilde ſauages, that drinke of running ſprings,

Thinke water farre excels all earthly things :
But they that daily taſte neat wine, deſpiſe it.
Virginitie, albeit ſome highly priſe it,
Compar'd with mariage, had you tride them both,
Differs as much,as wine and water doth.
Baſe boullion for the ſtamps ſake we alow,
Euen ſo for mens impreſſion doe we you.
By which alone,our reuerend fathers ſay,
Women receiue perfection euey way.
This idoll which you terme Virginitie,
Is neither eſſence ſubiect to the eie,
No,nor to any one exterior ſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence,
Nor is't of earth or mold celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.
Of that which hath no being,do not boaſt,
Things that are not at all, are neuer loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous,
What vertue is it,that is borne with vs?
Much leſſe can honour be aſcribde thereto,
Honour is purchaſde by the deeds we do.
Beleeue me Hero, honour is not wone,
Vntill ſome honourable deed be done.
Secke you for chaſtitie, immortall fame,
And know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name ?
Whoſe name is it, if ſhe be falſe or not,
So ſhe be faire, but ſome vile tongues will blot?

But you are faire (aye me) ſo wondrous faire,
So young, ſo gentle, and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke, if thus you liue alone,
Some one or other keepes you as his owne.
Then Hero hate me not, nor from me flie
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamie. I
Perhaps,thy ſacred Prieſthood makes thee loath,
Tell me,to whom mad'ſt thou that heedleſſe oath?
To Venus, anſwered ſhee, and as ſhee ſpake,
Foorth from thoſe two tralucent ceſternes brake
A ſtreame of liquid pearle, which downe her face
Made milk-white paths,whereon the gods might trace
To Ioues high court. Hee thus replide : The rites
In which Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,
Are banquets,Doricke muſicke, midnight-reuell,
Plaies,maskes, and all that ſterne age counteth euill.
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhe ſcorne,
For thou in vowing chaſtitie, haſt ſworne
To rob her name and honour, and thereby
Commit'ſt a ſinne farre worſe than periurie.
Euen ſacriledge againſt her Deitie,
Through regular and formall puritie.
To expiat which ſinne, kiſſe and ſhake hands,
Such ſacrifice as this, Venus demands.
Thereat ſhe ſmilde, and did denie him ſo,
As put thereby, yet might he hope for mo.
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his ſpeech,

And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold Virginitie,
The gentle Queene of Loues ſole enemie.
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nun,
When Venus ſweet rites are perform'd and dun,
Flint -breſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your miſtreſſe are at ſtriſe.
Loue Hero then, and be not tyrannous, x
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeeres with auarice,
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt corne dies, if it be not reapt,
Beautie alone is loſt, too warily kept.
Theſe arguments he vs'd, and may more,
Wherewith ſhe yeelded, that was woone before,
Heroes lookes yeelded,but her words made warre,
Women are woon when they begin to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallow'd Cupids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd the deeper was ſhe ſtrooke.
Yet euilly faining anger, ſtroue ſhe ſtill,
And would be thought to grant againſt her will.
So hauing paus'd a while, at laſt ſhe ſaid :
Who taught thee Rhetoricke to deceiue a maid ?
Aye me,ſuch words as theſe ſhould I abhorre,
And yet I like them for the Orator.

With that Leander ſtoopt, to haue imbrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him. Gentle youth forbeare
To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke, and vnderneath a hill,
Far from the towne ( where all is whiſt and ſtill,
Saue that the ſea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends forth a ratling murmure to the land,
Whoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſit vs.)
My turret ſtands and there God knowes I play
With Venus ſwannes and ſparrowes all the day.
A dwarfiſh beldarne beares me companie,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And ſpends the night (that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe,and apiſh merriment.
Come thither ; As ſhe ſpake this,her tongue tript,
For vnawares (Come thither ) from her ſlipt,
And ſodainly her former colour chang'd,
And here and there her eies through anger rang'd.
And like a planet,moouing ſeuerall waies,
At one ſelfe inſtant,ſhe poore ſouleaſſaies,
Louing, not to loue at all,and euerie part,
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her heart.
And hands ſo pure,ſo innocent,nay ſuch,
As might haue made heauen ſtoope to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vphold to Venus, and againe,

Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtitie,but all in vaine,
Cupid beats downe her praiers with his wings,
Her vowes aboue the emptie aire he flings :
All deepe enrag'd,his ſinowie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtrooken,look't ſo dolefully
As made Loue ſigh,to ſee his tirannie.
And as ſhe wept,her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd.
Then towards the pallace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment and griefe he flies.
And to thoſe ſterne nymphes humbly made requeſt,
Both might enioy each other, and be bleſt.
But with a ghaſtly dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouſand deaths at euerie glance,
They anſwered Loue, nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word,their hate to him was ſuch.
Harken a while, and I will tell you why :
Heauens winged herrald, Ioue-borne Mercurie,
The ſelfe- ſame day that he aſleep had laid
Inchanted Argus, ſpied a countrie maid,
Whoſe careleſſe haire,in ſtead of pearle t'adorne it :
Gliſtred with deaw,as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it :
Her breath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure,and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet prowd ſhe was,(for loftie pride that dwels
In tow red courts, is oft in ſhepheards cels.)

And too too well the faire vermillion knew,
And ſiluer tincture of her cheekes,that drew
The loue of euerie ſwaine : On her this god
Enamoured was, and with his ſnakie rod,
Did charme her nimble feet , and made her ſtay,
The while vpon the hillocke downe he lay,
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancie to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt,
And then he woo'd with kiſſes, and at laſt,
As ſhepheards do, her on the ground he laid,
And tumbling in the graſſe, he often ſtraid
Bey ond the bounds of ſhame, in being bold
To eie thoſe partes, which no eie ſhould behold.
And like an inſolent commaunding louer,
Boaſting his parenrage, would needs diſcouer
The way to new Eliſium : but ſhe,
Whoſe onely dower was her chaſtitie,
Hauing ſtriu'ne in vaine, was now about to crie,
And craue the helpe of ſhepheards that were nie.
Herewith he ſtaid his futie, and began
To giue her leaue to riſe, away ſhe ran,
After went Mercurie, who vſde ſuch cunning,
As ſhe to heare his tale, left off her running.
Maids are not woon by brutiſh force and might,
But ſpeeches full of pleaſures and delight.
And knowing Hermes courted her,was glad

That ſhe ſuch louelineſſe and beautie had,
As could prouoke his liking, yet was mute,
And neither would denie, nor grant his ſute.
Still vow'd he loue, ſhe wanting no excuſe
To feed him with delaies,as women vſe :
Or thirſting after immortalitie,
All women are ambitious naturally,
Impoſde vpon her louer ſuch a taske,
As he ought not performe,nor yet ſhe aske.
A draught of flowing Nectar ſhe requeſted,
Wherewith the king of Gods and men is feaſted.
He readie to accompliſh what ſhe wild,
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe, Ioues cup fild,)
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike loue,
Which being knowne ( as what is hid from Ioue)
He inly ſtorm'd, and waxt more furious,
Than for thr fire filcht by Promethius ;
And thruſts him down from heauen,he wandring here,
n mournfull tearmes,with ſad and heauie cheere
omplaind to Cupid,Cupid for his ſake,
To be reueng'd on Ioue, did vndertake,
nd thoſe on whom heauen,earth,and hell relies,
I meane the Adamantine Deſtinies,
He wounds with loue, and forſt them equally,
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercurie.
They offred him the deadly fatall knife,
That ſheares the ſlender threads of humane life,

At his faire feathered feet,the engins laid,
Which th'earth from ougly Chaos den vp-waid :
Theſe he regarded not,but did intreat,
That Ioue, vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he crau'd,and once againe,
Saturne and Ops,began their golden raigne.
Murder, rape,warre,luſt and trecherie,
Were with Ioue clos'd in Stigian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got ;
He reckleſſe of his promiſe, did deſpiſe
The loue of th'euerlaſting Deſtinies.
They ſeeing it, both Loue and him abhor'd,
And Iupiter vnto his place reſtor'd.
And but that Learning, in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeat of Ioue it ſelfe aduance,
Hermes had ſlept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and Pouertie ſhould alwaies kis.
And to this day is euerie ſcholler poore,
Groſſe gold from theni runs headlong to the Boore.
I ikewiſe the angrie ſiſters thus dcluded,
To venge themſelues on Hermes,haue concluded
That Midas brood ſhall ſit in Honors chaire,

To which the Muses ſonnes are onely heire :
And fruitfull wits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent run into regions farre ;
And few great Lords in vertuous deeds ſhall ioy,
But be ſurpris'd with euerie gariſh toy.
And ſtill inrich the loftie ſeruile Clowne,
Who with incroching guile,keepes learning downe.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuite no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the Fates were iniured.

Y this, ſad Hero, with loue vnacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face,fell downe and fainted.
He kiſt her, and breath'd life into her lips,

Wherewith as one diſpleaſde, away ſhe trips.
Yet as ſhe went,full often lookt behinde,
And many poore excuſes did ſhe finde,
To linger by the way,and once ſhe ſtaid,
And would haue turnde againe, but was afraid,
In offring parlie, to be counted light.
So on ſhe goes, and in her idle flight,
Her painted fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a nouice,knew not what ſhe meant,
But ſtaid, and after her a letter ſent.
Which ioyfull Hero anſwerd in ſuch ſort,
As he had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall graces lock'd their wealth,
And therefore to her tower he got by ſtealth.
Wide open ſtood the doore,he need not clime ;
And ſhe her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Hnd ſpread the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome,
And oft look'd out,and mus'd he did not come.
At laſt he came, O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedie louers had,at their firſt meeting.
He askt,ſhe gaue,and nothing was denied,
Both to each other quickly were affied.
Looke how their hands,ſo were their hearts vnited,
And what he did, ſhe willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kiſſes, the imbracements ſweet,
When like deſires and affections nieet,

For from the earth to heauen,is Cupid rais'd,
Where fancie is in equall ballance pais'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhneſſe ſodainly repented,
And turn'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented.
As if her name and honor had been wrong'd,
By being poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long'd :
I,and ſhe wiſht,albeit not from her hart,
That he would leaue her turret and depart.
The mirthfull God of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Nimph beguil'd.
For hitherto he did but fan the fier,
And kept it downe that it might mount the hier.
Now waxt ſhe iealous,leaſt his loue abated,
Fearing,her owne thoughts made her to be hated.
Therefore vnto him haſtilie ſhe goes,
And like light Salmacis,her bodie throes
Vpon his boſome,where with yeelding eyes,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger,if he were diſpleas'd,
O what god would not therewith be appeas'd ?
Like Æſops cocke, this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed,
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good will had wone.
But know you not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haue a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduaunce a ſtep,

Mou'd by Loues force,vnto each other lep?
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect.
Albeit Leander rude in loue, and raw,
Long dallying with Hero, nothing ſaw
That might delight him more,yet he ſuſpected
Sonie amorous rites or other were neglected:
Therefore vnto his bodie, hirs he clung,
She,fearing on the ruſhes to be flung,
Striu'd with redoubled ſtrength,the more ſhe ſtriued,
The more a gentle pleaſant heat reuiued,
Which taught him all that elder louers know,
And now the ſame gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine termes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it.
Loue alwaies makes thoſe eloquent that haue it.
Shee, with a kind of graunting, put him by it,
And euer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,
Like to the tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lauiſh,ſau'de her maidenhead.
Ne're Ring more ſought to keepe his Diademe,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gemme.
Aboue our life we loue a ſtedfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of great worth we ſend,
We often kiſſe it, often looke thereon,
And ſtay the meſſenger that would be gon :
No maruell then, though Hero would not yeeld
So ſoone to part from that ſhe deerely held.

Iewels being loſt are found againe,this neuer,
T'is loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for euer.
Now had the morne eſpy'de her louers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhe ſtarts,puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that he ſtaid ſo long,
Al headlong throwes her ſelf the clouds among.
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbraſt her ſodainly,tooke leaue,and kiſt.
Long was he taking leaue and loth to go,
And kiſt againe,as louers vſde to do,
Sad Hero wroong him by the hand,Ind wept,
Saying,let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the doore,ſhe turnd about
As loath to ſee Leander going out.
And now the Sun that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe louers,downeward creepes.
So that in ſilence of the cloudie night,
Though it was morning,did he take his flight.
But what the ſecret truſtie night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Wherewith ſhe wreth'd her largely ſpreading hear.
Nor could the youth abſtaine,but he muſt weare
The ſacred ring wherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious thaſtitie ſhe vow'd :
Which made his loue through Sestos to be knowne,

And thence vnto Abydus ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſaile,for incorporall Fame,
Whoſe waight conſiſts in nothing but her name,
Is ſwifter than the wind,whoſe tardie plumes,
Are recking water, and dull earthlie fumes.
Home when he came,he ſeem'd not to be there,
But like exiled aire thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in a forren place,and ſtraight from thence,
Alcides like,by mightie violence,
He would haue chac'd away the ſwelling maine,
That him from het :niuſtly did detaine.
Like as the ſunne in a Dyameter,
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heateth kindly,ſhining lat'rally ;
So beautie,ſweetly quickens when t'is ny,
But being ſeparated and remooued,
Burnes where it cheriſht, murders where it loued.
Therefore euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was young Leanders looke,
O none bur gods haue power their loue to hide,
Affection by the count nance is deſcride.
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd,betraies poore louers.
His ſecret flame apparantly was ſeene,
Leanders Father knew where he had beene,
And for the ſame mildly rebuk't his ſonne,
Thinking to quench the ſparckles new begonne.

But loue reſiſted once, growes paſſionate,
And nothing more than counſaile,louers hate.
For as a hote prowd horſe highly diſdaines
To haue his head concrol'd, but breakes the raines,
Spits foorth the ringled bit, and with his houes,
Checkes the ſubmiſliue ground : ſo he that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd,the woorſe he fares,
What is it now,but mad Leander dares ?
O Hero,Hero,thus he cryd'e full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft.
Where hauing ſpy'de her tower,long ſtar'd he on't,
And pray'de the narrow toyling Helleſpont,
To part in twaine that he might come and go,
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no.
With that he ſtript him to the yu'rie skin,
And crying,Loue I come,leapt liuely in.
Whereat the ſaphir viſag'd god grew prowd,
And made his capring Triton ſound alowd,
Imagining,that Ganimed diſpleas'd,
Had left the heauens, therefore on him he ſeaz'd.
Leander ſtriu'd,the waues about him wound,
And puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle,and in low corrall groues
Sweet ſinging Meremaids,ſported with their loues
On heapes of heauie gold,and tooke great pleaſure,
To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort,the ſhipwracke treaſure.
For here the ſtately azure pallace ſtood,

Where kingly Neptune and his traine abode,
The luſtie god imbra'ſt him, cald him loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to Ioue.
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp, and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple mace,
Which mounted vp, intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt him.
Leander being vp be gan to ſwim,
And looking backe, ſaw Neptune follow him.
hereat agaſt, the poore ſoule gan to crie,
me viſit Hero ere I die.
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the ſea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He clapt his plumpe cheekes,with his treſſes plaid,
And ſmiling wantonly,his loue bewraid.
He watcht his armes,and as they opend wide,
At euerie ſtroke,bet wixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe,and then run out and dance,
And as he turnde, caſt many a luſtfull glance,
And threw him gawdie toyes to pleaſe his eie,
And diue into the water, and there prie
Vpon his breſt,his thighes,and euerie lim,
And vp againe, and cloſe beſide him ſwim.
And talkt of loue : Leander made replie,
You are deceiu'd, I am no woman I,

Thereat ſmilde Neptune,and then told a tale,
How that a ſheapheard ſitting in a vale,
Playd with a boy ſo faire and kind,
As for his loue,both earth and heauen pyn'd ;
That of the cooling riuer durſt not drinke,
Leaſt water-nymphs ſhould pull him from the brinke.
And when he ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Gote-footed Satyrs,and vp-ſtaring Fawnes,
Would ſteale him thence. Ere halfe this tale was done,
Aye me, Leander cryde, th'enamoured ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſſie bower,
Deſcends vpon my raiant Heroes tower.
O that the ſetardie armes of mine were wings,
And as he ſpake,vpon the waues he ſprings.
Neptune was angrie that he gaue no eare,
And in his heart reuenging malice bare :
He flung at him his mace,but as it went,
He cald it in,for loue made him repent.
The mace returning backe,his owne hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this freſh bleeding wound Leander viewd,
His colour went and came,as if he rewd.
The griefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſts,
Relenting thoughts,remorſe and pittie reſts.
And who haue hard hearts,and obdurat minds,
But vicious,harebraind,and illit'rate hinds ?
The god ſeeing him with pittie to be moued,

Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith,too credulous,
With folly and falſe hope deluding vs.)
Wherefore Leanders fancie to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for giftes he flies.
Tis wiſedome to giue much, a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſwading Oratorie failes,
By this Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his wearie feet,and felt the ſand
Breathleſſe albeit he were,he reſted not,
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got.
Aud knockt and cald, at which celeſtiall noiſe,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioies
Then Nimphs and ſhepheards,when the timbrel rings,
Or crooked Dolphin when the ſailer ſings,
She ſtaid not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunke with gladneſſe,to the doore ſhe goes.
Where ſeeing a naked man,ſhe ſcriecht for feare,
Such ſights as this, to tender maids are rare.
And ran into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich Iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
Vnto her was he led,or rather drawne,
Ty thoſe white limns,which ſparkled through the lawne.
The neerer that he came,the more ſhe fled,
And ſeckinig refuge, ſlipt into her bed.
Where on Leander ſitting,thus bsgan,
Though numming cold,all feeble,faint and wan :

If not for loue,yet loue for pittie ſake,
Me in thy bed and maiden boſome take,
At leaſt vouchſafe theſe armes ſonie little roome,
Who hoping to imbrace thee,cherely ſwoome.
This head was beat with many a churliſh billow,
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Herewith affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her luke-warme place Leander lay.
Whoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
Would animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The drooping thoughts of baſedeclining ſoules,
Then drerie Mars,carowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare,
She ouercome with ſhame and ſallow feare,
Like chaſt Liana,when Acteon ſpyde her,
Being ſodainly betraide,dyu'd downe to hide her.
And as her ſiluer body downeward went,
With both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſecure,
O'recaſt with dim and darkſonie couerture.
And now ſhe lets him whiſper in her eare,
Flatter,intreat,promiſe, proteſt and ſwcare,
Yet euer as he greedily aſſayd,
To touch thoſe dainties,ſhe the Harpey playd,
And euery lim did as a ſoldier ſtout,
Defend the fort,and keepe the foe-man out.
For though the riſing yu'rie mount he ſcal'd,

Which is with azure circling liues empal'd,
Much like a globe,(a globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſailes to regions full of blis,
Yet there with Syſiphus he toylde in vaine,
Till gentle parlie did the truce obtaine.
She trembling ſtroue,this ſtrife of hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat,
Of vnknowne ioy. Treaſon was in her thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not woon, yet woon ſhe was at length,
In ſuch warres women vſe but halfe their ſtrength.
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entred the orchard of Theſperides.
Whoſe fruit none rightly can deſcribe,but hee
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree :
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe ſpoke ſome things,and ſigh'd out the reſt ;
Which ſo preuail'd, as he with ſmall ado,
Inclos'd her in his armes and kiſt her to.
And euerie kiſſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme.
So that the truce was broke, and ſhe alas,
(Poore ſillie maiden) at his mercie was.
Loue is not full of pittie (as men ſay)
But deafe and cruell,where he meanes to pray.
Euen as a bird,which in our hands we wring,
Fourth plungeth,and oft flutters with her wing.

And now ſhe wiſht this night were neuer done.
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th' approching ſunne,
For nuch it grieu'd her that the bright day-light,
Should know the pleaſure of the bleſſed night.
And then like Mars and Ericine diſplaid,
Both in each other armes chaind as they laid.
Againe ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to him whom in a moment tooke,
That which ſo long ſo charily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth away ſhe would haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were whipping out,
He on the ſuddaine clingd her ſo about,
That Meremaid-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
And halfe appear'd the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed ſhe bluſhing ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance behold ye might,
A kind of twilight breake,which through the heare,
As from an orient cloud,glymſe here and there.
And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought foorth the day before the day was borne.
So Heroes ruddie cheeke Hero betraid.
And her all naked to his ſight diſplaid
Whence his admiring eyes more pleaſure tooke,
Than Dis, on heapes of gold fixing his looke.
By this Apollos golden harpe began,

To ſound foorth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchfuli Hesperus no ſooner heard,
Bt he the day bright bearing Car prepar'd.
And ran before,as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ougly night,
Till ſhe o'recome with anguiſh,ſhame,and rage,
Hurld downe to hell her loathſome carriage.