N Helleſpont guilty of true loues blood,
WIn view and oppoſit two Cities ſtood,
Seaborders,diſioin'd by Neptunes might,
The one Abydos, the other Seſtos hight.
At Seſtos Hero dwelt, Hero the faire,
Whom young Apollo courted for her haire,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where ſhe ſhould ſit for men to gaze vpon.
The outſide of her garments were of lawne,
The lining, purple ſilke with guilt ſtarres drawne,
Her wide ſleeues greene,and borderered with a groue
Where Venus in her naked glory ſtroue,
To pleaſe the careleſſe and diſdainfull eyes
Of proud Adonis that before her lies
Her kirtle blew,whercon was many a ſtaine,
Made with the blood of wretched louets ſleine.

Vpon het head ſhe ware a myrtle wreath,
From whenee hervaile reacht to the ground beneath,
Her vaile was artificiall flowers and ſeaues,
Whoſe workmanſhip both man and beaſt deceiues.
Many would praiſe the ſweet ſmell as ſhe paſt,
When t'was the odour which her breath forth caſt.
And there for hony,Bees haue ſought in vaine,
And beat from thence,haue lighted there againe.
About her necke hung chaines of peble ſtone,
VVhich lightned by her necke, like Diamons ſhone.
She ware no gloues,for neieher ſunne nor wind,
Would burne or parch her hands ,but to her mind,
Or warme or coole them,for they tooke delite,
To play vpon tho'e hands, they were ſo white,
Buskins of ſhels,all ſiluered vſed ſhee,
And brancht with bluſhing Corall to the knee,
Where ſparrowes pearcht, of hollow pearle and golde,
Such as the world would wonder to behold
Thoſe with ſweet water oft her handmaid fils,
Which as ſhe went would cherup through the bils.
Some ſay for her the faireſt Cupid pin'd,
And looking in her face was ſtrucken blind,
But this is true,ſo like was one the other.
As he imagin'd Hero was her mother.
And oftentimes in to her boſome flew,
About her naked necke his bare armes threw,
And laid his childiſh head vpon her breaſt,

And with ſtill panting rocke, there tooke his reſt.
So louely faire was Hero, Venus Nun,
As Nature wept,thinking ſhe was vndone,
Beca ſe ſhee tooke more from her then ſhe left,
And of ſuch wondrous beauty her bereft,
There fore in ſigne her treaſure ſuffred wrache,
Since Heroes time,hath halfe the world been blacke.
Amorous Leander,beautifull and young
( Whoſe tragedy diuine Miſaus ſung)
Dwelt at Abydus ſince him, dwelt there none,
For whom ſucceeding times may greater mone,
His dangling treſſes that were neuer ſhorne,
Had they beene cut,and vnto Colchos borne,
VVould haue allur'd the ventrous youth of Greece
To hazard more then for the golden fleece.
Faire Cynthia wiſht his armes might be her ſphere,
Griefe makes her pale, becauſe ſhe moues not there.
His body was as ſtraight as Circes wand,
Ioue might haue ſipt out Nectar from his hand,
Euen as delicious meat is to the taſte,
So was his necke in touching,and ſurpaſt
The white of Pelops ſhoulder, I could tell yee,
How ſmooth his breaſt was,& how white his belly,
And whoſe im mortall fingers did imprint
That heauenly path,with many a curious dint,
That runs along his backe,but my rude pen,
Can hardly blazon forth the loues of men.

Miich ſeſſe of powerfull gods,let it ſuffice,
That my ſlacke Muſe muſt ſing of Leanders eyes.
Theſe orient cheeks and lips,exceeding his
Th a tleapt into the water for a kiſſe
Of his owne ſhadow,and deſpiſing many,
Died ere he could enioy the loue of any.
Had wilde Hippolitus Leander ſeen,
Enamored of his beauty had hee bee ne,
His preſence made the rudeſt paiſant melt,
That in the vaſt vplandiſh country dwelt,
The barbarous Thracian ſouldier mou'd with nough,
Was mou'd with him,and for his fauour ſought.
Some ſwore hee was a maid in mans attire,
Fot in his lookes were all that men deſire,
A pleaſant ſmiling cheeke,a ſpeaking eye,
A bro w for Loue to banquet royally,
And ſuch as knew hee was a man, would ſay,
Leander thou art made for amorous play,
Why art thou not in Loue,and lou'd of all:
Though thou be faire,yet be not thine owne thrall.
The men of wealthy Seſtos euery yeere,
(For his ſake whom their Goddeſſe held ſo deare.
Roſe cheekt Adonis kept a ſolemne feaſt,
Thither reſorted many a wandred gueſt,
To meet their loues,ſuch as had none a all,
Came Louers home from this great feſtiuall.
For euery ſtreet like to a Firmament,

Gliſtered with breathing ſtars,who where theywent
Frighted the Melancholy earth, which deem'd,
Eternall heauen to burne,for ſo it ſeem'd,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guid ance of the ſunnes rich chariot.
But farre aboue the louelieſt Hero ſhin'd,
And ſtole away th'inchanted gazers mind,
For like Sea Nimphs inueigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the ſtanders by.
Nor that night wandring pale and watry ſtarre,
(When yawning Dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount vp to the gloomie skie,
VVhere crown'd with blaſing light and maieſty
She prondly ſits) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than ſhee the hearts of thoſe that neere her ſtood.
Euen as, when gawdy Nimphes purſue the chaſe,
Wretched Ixions ſhaggy footed race,
Incenſt with ſauage heate,gallop am aine,
From ſteepe Pine,bearing mountaines to the plaine :
So ran the people foorth to gaze vpon her,
And all that view'd her,were enamour'd on her.
And as in a fury of dreadfull fight,
Their fellowes being ſlaine,or put to flight,
Poore ſoldiers ſtand with feare of death dead ſtrooken
So at her preſence all ſurprizde and tooken,
Await the ſentence cf her ſcornefull eies :
He whom ſhe fauours liues, the other dies.

There mightyou ſee one ſigh,another rage,
And ſome(their violent paſſio ns to aſſw age)
Compile ſharpe Satyts,but alas too late,
For faith full loue will neuer turne to hate,
And many ſeeing great Princes were denied,
Pin'd as they went,and thinking on her died,
On this feaſt day, O curſed day and hower
Went Hero thorow Sectos,from her tower.
To Venus temple,where vnhappily,
As after chanc'd,they did each other ſpie,
So faire a Church as this had Venus none,
The wals were of diſcoloured Iaſper ſtone,
Wherein was Proteus caru'd,and ouer head
A lely vine of greene ſea agget ſpread,
Where by one hand light headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other,wine from grapes out wrung.
Of Chriſtall ſhining faire,the pauement was,
The towne of Sectos, calde it Venus glaſſe,
There might you ſee the gods in ſundry ſhapes,
Committing headdy ryots,inceſt,rapes,
For know that vnderneath this radiant flower
Was Danaes ſtatue in a brazen tower,
Ioue ſtily ſtealing from his ſiſters bed,
To dally with Idalian G animed;
And for his loue Europa bello wing lowd,
And tumbling with therainbow in a cloud,
ooo r aſig  euing eyron e,

VVhich ſimping Vulcan and his Cyclops ſet :
Loue kindling fire,to burne ſuch townes as Troy,
Siluanus weeping for the louely boy,
That now is turnd into a Cypres tree,
Vnder whoſe ſhade the Wood-gods loue to be.
And in the midſt a ſiluer alter ſtood,
There Hero ſacrificing turtles blood,
Taild to the ground,vailing her eye-lids cloſe,
And modeſtly they opened as ſhee roſe.
Thence flew Loues arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone ſtill hee ſtood,and euermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his countenance blazed,
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was ſtrooke,
Such force and vertue hath an amorous looke.
It lies not in our power to loue or hate,
For will in vs is ouer-rulde by fate:
When two are ſtript long ere the courſe begin,
Wee wiſh that one ſhould loſe,the other winne.
And one eſpecially doo we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each reſpect,
The reaſon no man knowes,let it ſuffice,
What we behold is cenſur'd by our eyes.
Where both delibrat,the loue is ſlight,
Who euer lou'd,that lou'd not at firſt ſight.
He kneel'd,but vnto her deuoutly praid :
Chaſt Hero,to her ſelfe thus ſoftly ſaid :

Were I the Saint he worſhips,I would heare him,
And as ſhe ſpake thoſe words, came ſomew hat neere,
(him. He ſtarted vp,ſhe bluſht as one aſham'd,
VVherewith Leander much more was inflam'd,
He toucht her hand,in touching it ſhe trem bled,
Leue deepely grounded,hardly is diſſembled.
Th ſe louers parled by the touch of hands,
True loue is mnte and oft amazed ſtands.
Thus while dumb ſigns their ycelding harts en tagled,
The aire with ſparkes of liuing fire was ſpangled,
And night deepe drencht in miſtie Acheron,
Heau'd vp her Lead,and halfe the world vpon,
Breathd dar eneſſe forth(darke night is Cupids day,)
Andv be ins Leander to diſplay,
Lo es holy fire,with words,with ſighes,and teares,
Which like ſweste muſicke entred Heroes eares,
And yet at euery word ſhe turnde aſide,
And alwwayes cut him cff as hee replide.
At laſt like to a bold ſharpe Sophiſter,
With chearefull hope thus he accoſted her.
Faire creature let me ſpeake withont offence,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts,as thy faire lookes doe mine,
Then ſhouldſt thou be his priſoner who is thine,
Be not vnkind and faire,miſhapen ſtuffe
Are of behauiours boiſtcrous and ruffe.
O ſſun me not,but heare me ere you goe,

G od knowes I cannot force loue as you doe.
My words ſhall be as ſpotleſſe as my youth,
Full of ſimplicitie and naked truth.
This ſacrifice (whoſe ſweet perfume deſcending,
From Venus altar to your foot ſteps bending)
Doth teſtifie that you exceed her farre,
To whom you offer,and whoſe Nunne you are.
VVhy ſhould you worſhip her,her you ſurpaſſe,
As much as ſparkling Diamonds flaring glaſſe.
A Diamend ſet in lead his worth retaincs,
A heauenly Nimph belou'd of humane ſwaines,
Receiues no blemiſh,but oftetimes more grace,
VVhich makes me hope,although I am but baſe,
Baſe in reſpect of thee,diuine and pure,
Datifull ſeruice may thy loue procure,
And I'n duety will excell all other,
As thon in beautie doeſt exceed loues mother.
Nor heauen nor thou were made to gaze vpon,
As heauen preſerues all things,ſo ſaue thou one.
A ſtately builded ſhip,well rig'd and tall,
The Ocean maxeth more maieſticall :
Why voweſt thou then to liue in Seſtos here,
Who on Loues ſeas more glorious wouſdſt appeare :
Like vntun'd golden ſtrings all women are,
Which long time lie vntoucht will harſhly iarre.
Veſſels of braſſe cft handled,brightiy ſhine,
What difference betwixt the richeſt Mine,

And baleſt mold,but vſe,for both not vſde,
Are of like worth. Then treaſure is abuſde,
When miſers keepe it,being put to lone,
In time it will returne vs two for one.
Rich robes, themſelues and others doe adorne,
Neither themſelues nor others,if not worne.
Who builds a pallace,and rams vp the gate,
Shall ſee it ruinous and deſolate.
Ah ſimple Hero learne thy ſelfe to cheriſh,
Lone women like to empty houſes periſh
Leſſe ſins the poore rich man that ſterues himſelfe,
In heaping vp a maſſe of droſsie pelfe,
Than ſuch as you, his golden earth remaines,
VVhich after his deceaſe ſome other gaines.
But this faire gem ſweet,in the loſſe alone,
When you fleet hence,can be bequeath'd to none,
Or if it could,downe from th'enameld skie,
All heauen would come to claime this legacie,
And with inteſtine broiles the world deſtroy
And quite confound natures ſweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures ſhould enioy that blis,
One is no number,m aids are nothing then,
Without the ſweet ſociety of men.
Wilt thou liue ſingle ſtill? one ſhalt thou be,
Though neuer-ſingling Hmen couple thee.
Vild ſauages, that drinke of running ſprings,

Thinke water farreexcels all earthly things,
But they that daily taſte neate wine deſpiſe it,
Virginity,albeit ſome highly priſe it,
Compar'd with mariage,had you tride them both,
Differs as much,as wine and water doth:
Baſe boullion for the ſtampes ſake wee allow,
Euen ſo for mens impreſsion doe we you,
By which alone,our reuerend fathers ſay
Women receiue perfection euery way,
This Idoll which you tearme Virginity
Is neither eſſence ſubiect to the eye,
No,nor to any one exterior ſence,
Nor hath it any place of reſidence,
Nor is't of earth or molde celeſtiall,
Or capable of any forme at all.
Of that which hath no beeing doe not boaſt,
Things that are not at all,are neuer loſt.
Men fooliſhly doe call it vertuous,
What vertue is it,that is borne with vs,
Much leſſe can honour be aſcribde thereto,
Honour is purch aſde by the deedes wee doe,
Belieue me Hero honour is not wWonne,
Vntill ſome honourable deed bee done.
Seeke you for chaſtity,im mortall fame,
And know that ſome haue wrong'd Dianas name,
Whoſe name is it,if ſhe be falſe or nor,
So ſhee be faire,but ſome vile tongues will blot?

But you are faire (aye me) ſo wondrous faire,
So young,ſo gentle,and ſo debonaire,
As Greece will thinke, if thus yon liue alone
Some one or other keepes you as his owne,
Then Hero hate me not,nor from meflie,
To follow ſwiftly blaſting infamie,
Perhaps thy ſacred Pri ſthood makes thee loath,
Tell me,to whom mad'ſt thou that heedleſſe oath :
To Venus, anſwered ſhee,and as ſhce ſpake,
Foorth fiom thoſe two tralucent ceſternes brake,
A ſtreame of liquid pearle, which downe her face
Made m'll ewhite paths,wheron the gods might trace,
To Ioues high Court. He thus replide : the rites
In which Loues beauteous Empreſſe moſt delites,
Are banquets, Doricke muſicke,midnight reuell,
Playes , Maskes,and all that ſterne age counteth euill.
Thee as a holy Idiot doth ſhee ſcorne,
For thou in vowing chaſtiry,haſt ſworne,
To rob her name and honour,and thereby
Commit'ſt a ſinne farre worſe than periury.
Euen ſacriledge againſt her Deity
Throngh regular and formell puritie.
To xitwhich ſinne,kiſſe,and ſhake hands.
Such ſecriſice as this Venus demands.
Th ereat ſheſmilde, and did deny him ſo,
As put thereby,yet might he hope for moe,
e o ee

And her in humble manner thus beſeech.
Though neither gods nor men m ay thee deſerue,
Yet for her ſake whom you haue vow'd to ſerue,
Abandon fruitleſſe cold Virginity,
The gentle Queene of Loues ſole enemy,
Then ſhall you moſt reſemble Venus Nun,
When Venus ſiyeet ritee are perform'd and dun,
Flint-breſted Pallas ioyes in ſingle life,
But Pallas and your Miſtriſſe ane at ſrife.
Loue Hero then,and be not tyrannous,
But heale the heart that thou haſt wounded thus,
Nor ſtaine thy youthfull yeares with auarice,
Faire fooles delight to be accounted nice.
The richeſt corne dies,if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is loſt,tco warily kept,
Theſe argumen s he vs'd,and many more,
Where with ſhe yeelded,th at was wonne before,
Heroes lookes yeelded,but her words made warre,
Women are woont when they beginne to iarre.
Thus hauing ſwallowed Cupids golden hooke,
The more ſhe ſtriu'd, the deeper was ſhee ſtrooke,
Yet eu lly faining anger,ſtroue ſhee ſtill,
And would be thought to grant againſt her will.
So hauing paus'd a while,at laſt ſhe ſaid,
Who taught thee Rhetorike to deceiue a maid ?
Aye me,ſuch w ords as theſe ſhould I abhorre,
And yet I like them for the Orator.

With that Leander ſtoopt to haue imbrac'd her,
But from his ſpreading armes away ſhe caſt her,
And thus beſpake him : Gentle youth forbeare
To touch the ſacred garments which I weare.
Vpon a rocke,and vnderneath a hill,
Farre from the townc(where all is wh iſt and ſtill,
Saue that the ſea playing on yellow ſand,
Sends forth a ratling murmure to the land,
VVhoſe ſound allures the golden Morpheus,
In ſilence of the night to viſite vs.)
Ny turret ſtands,and there God knowes I play,
With Venus ſwannes,and ſparrowes all the day.
A dwarfiſh beldam beares me company,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And ſpends the night (that might be better ſpent)
In vaine diſcourſe,and apiſh meriment,
Come thither : As ſhe ſpake this,her tongue tript,
For vnawares ( Come thither )f'rom her ſligt,
And ſodainely her former colour chang'd,
And hcre and there her eyes through anger rang'd,
And like a planet mouing ſeuerall wayes,
At one ſelfe inſtant,ſhe poore ſoule aſſaies,
Louing, not to loue at all,and euery part,
Stroue to reſiſt the motions of her heart,
And hands ſo pare,ſo innocent,nay ſuch
As might haue made heauen ſtoope to haue a touch,
Did ſhe vphold to Venus,and againe,

Vow'd ſpotleſſe chaſtity,but all in vaine,
Cupid beats downe her prayers with his wings
Her vowes aboue the empty ayre he flingt,
All deepe enrag'd, his ſinowie bow he bent,
And ſhot a ſhaft, that burning from him went,
Wherewith ſhe ſtrooken lookt ſo dolefully,
As made Loue ſigh, to ſee his tyranny.
And as ſhee wepr, her teares to pearle he turn'd,
And wound them on his arme,and for her mourn'd,
Then to wards the palace of the Deſtinies,
Laden with languiſhment,and grieſe he ſlies,
And to thoſe ſterne nymphes,hum bly made requeſt,
Both mightenioy each other,and be bleſt,
But with a ghaſtly, dreadfull countenance,
Threatning a thouland deathes at euery glance,
They anſwered Loue,nor would vouchſafe ſo much
As one poore word,their hate to him was ſueh,
Hearken a while,and I will tell you why,
Heauens winged herrald, loue borne Mercurie,
The ſelfe ſame day that he aſleepe had laid
Inchanted Argus ſpied a country maid,
Whoſe careleſſe haire,in ſtead of pearle t'adorne it,
Gliſtred with dew,as one that ſeem'd to ſcorne it,
Her bre ath as fragrant as the morning roſe,
Her mind pure,and her tongue vntaught to gloſe.
Yet proud ſhe was, (ſor lofty pride that dwels,
In towred Courts,is oft in ſhepheards cels.)

And too too well the faire vermilion knew
And ſiluer tincture of her cheeks, that drew
The loue of euery ſwaine : On her this god
Enamoured was,and with his ſnakie rod,
Did charme her nimble feet,and made her ſtay,
The while vpon the hillocke downe he lay
And ſweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with ſmooth ſpeech her fancy to aſſay,
Till in his twining armes he lockt her faſt,
And then he woo'd with kiſſes,and at laſt,
As ſhe pheards doe,her on the ground he laid,
And tumbling in the graſſe,he often ſtraid
Beyond the bounds of ſhame,in being bold
To eye thoſe parts which no eye ſhould behold,
And li'e an inſolent com manding louer,
Boaſting his parentage,would needs diſcouer
The way to new Eliſium : but ſhe
Whoſe onely dower was her chaſti y.
Hauing ſtriu'ne in vaine,w as now about to crie,
And crane the helpe of ſhepheards that were nie.
Here with he ſtaid his fury and began
To g'ue her leaue to riſe,away ſhe ran,
After went Mercurie, who vſde ſuch cunning,
As ſhee to heare his tale,left off her running.
Maids are not wonne by brutiſh force and might.
Bu ſpeeches fullof pleaſures and delight,
ſand tnowing Hermes courtet her,was glad,

That ſhe ſuch lonelineſfe and beauty had,
As could prouoke his liking,yet was mute,
And neither would deny nor grant his ſute,
Still vow'd he loue,ſhe wanting' no excuſe,
To feed him with delaies as women vſe,
Or thirſting after immortahity,
All women are am bitious naturally,
Impoſde vpon her louer fuch a taske,
As he ought not performe,nor yet ſhe aske,
A draught of flowing Nectar ſhe requeſted,
Where with the king of gods and men is feaſted,
He ready to accompliſh what ſhee wilde;
Stole ſome from Hebe ( Hebe loues cup fild,
And gaue it to his ſimple ruſtike loue,
Which being knowne( as what ie hid from Ioue)
He inly ſtorm'd,and waxt more furious,
(here,Than for the fire filcht by Promethius,
And thruſts him down from heauen,he wandring
In mournfull tearmes,with ſad and heauy cheare,
Complaindeto Cupid,Cupid for his ſake,
To be reueng'd on loue did vndertake,
And thoſe on whom heauen,earth, and hell relies,
I meane the adamantine Deſtinies,
He wounds w ith loue,and forſt them equally,
To dote vpon deceitfull Mercurie,
They offered him the deadly fatall knife,
That ſheares the ſlender threads of humane life.

At this faire feathered feet,the engins laid,
Which th'earth from ougly Chaos den vp waid,
Theſe he regarded not,but did entreat,
That loue vſurper of his fathers ſeat,
Might preſently be baniſht into hell,
And aged Saturne in Olimpus dwyell.
They granted what he crau'd,and once againe,
Saturne and Ops began their golden raigne.
Murder,rape,warre,luſt and trecherie,
Were with Ioue clos'd in Stigian Emperie.
But long this bleſſed time continued not,
As ſoone as he his wiſhed purpoſe got,
He rechleſſe of his promiſe,did deſpiſe,
The loue of th'euerlaſting deſtinies.
They ſeeing it both Loue and him abhor'd,
And Iupiter vnto his place reſtor'd.
And but that learning in deſpight of Fate,
Will mount aloft,and enter heauen gate,
And to the ſeat of loue it ſelſe aduance,
Hermes had ſſept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a puniſhment they added this,
That he and pouerty ſhould alwayes kiſſe,
And to this day is euery ſcholler poore,
Groſſe gold from them runs headlong to the Bcore,
Likewiſe the angry ſiſters thus deluded,
To venge themſelues on Hermes,haue concluded,
Toat Iida brood ſhallſit in honors chaire,

To which the Muſes ſonnes are onely heire,
And fruitfull wits that in aſpiring are,
Shall diſcontent run into regions fatre,
And few great Lord in vertuous deeds ſhall ioy,
But be ſurpris'd with euery gariſh toy.
And ſtill inrich the loſty ſeruile Clowne,
Who with incroching guile,keepes learning downe.
Then muſe not Cupids ſuit no better ſped,
Seeing in their loues the Fates were iniured.

Y this ſad Hero with loue vnacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face,fell downe and fainted.
He kiſt her,and breath'd life into her lips.

VVherewwith as one diſpleaide,away ſhee trips,
Yet as ſhee went full often I okt bel ind,
And many poore excuſes, did ſhee finde
To linger by the way,and once ſhee ſtayde,
And would haue turnde againe,but was afraide,
In offering patly,to be counted light.
So on ſhee goes, and in her idle flght,
Her painted fanne of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to traine Leander therewithall.
He being a nouice knew not what ſhee meant.
But ſtaid,and after her a letter ſent :
VVhich ioyfull Hero anſwered in ſuch 'ort,
As hee had hope to ſcale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberall Graces lock'd their wealth,
And therefore to her to wer he got by ſtealth.
Wide open ſtood the dore,he need not clime,
And ſhee her ſelfe before the pointed time,
Had ſ'read the boord,with roſes ſtrowed the roome,
And oft looked out,and mus'd he did not come,
At laſt hee came, O who can tell the greeting,
Theſe greedy louers had at their firſt meeting ?
He askt ſhe gaue,and nothing was denied,
Both to each other quickly were af fied.
Looke how their hands,ſo were theit hearts vnited
And what he did,ſhe willingly requited.
Sweet are the kiſſ :s,the imbracements ſweet,
Vhen like deſires and affections meet.

For from theearth to heauen,is Cupid rais'd,
Where fancy is in equall ballance pais'd)
Yet ſhe this raſhnes ſodainely repented,
And turn'd aſide,and to her ſelfe lamented;
As if her name and honour had been wrong'd,
By beeing poſſeſt of him for whom ſhe long
I,and ſhe wiſht,albeit not from her hart,
That he would leaue her turret and depart,
The mirthfull God of amorous pleaſure ſmil'd,
To ſee how he this captiue Nymph beguil'd,
For hithertobe did but fan the fire,
And kept it downe that it might mount the hier.
Now waxt ſhe iealous,leſt his loue abated,
Fearing her owne thoughts,made her to be hated,
Therefore vnto him haſtily ſhe goes,
And like light Salmacis her body throes
Vpon his boſom,where with yeelding eyes,
She offers vp her ſelfe a ſacrifice,
To ſlake his anger,if he were diſpleas'd,
O what god would not therewith be appeas'd:
Like Aeſops cocke, this iewell he enioyed,
And as a brother with his ſiſter toyed.
Suppoſing nothing elſe was to be done,
Now he her fauour and good wil had wonne,
But know ye not that creatures wanting ſence,
By nature haue a mutuall appetence,
And wanting organs to aduance a ſtep,

Mou'd by Loues force,vnto each other lep,
Much more in ſubiects hauing intellect,
So me hidden influence breeds like effect,
Albeit Leander rude in loue,and raw,
Long dallying with Hero nothing ſaw,
That might delight him more,yet he ſuſpected
Some amorous rites or orher were neglected,
Therefore vnto his body,hirs he clung,
She,fearing on the ruſhes to be flung,
Striu'd wich redoubled ſtrength,the more ſhe ſtriued.
The more a gentle pleaſing heat reuiued,s
VVhich taught him all that elder louers know,
And now the ſam ? gan ſo to ſcorch and glow,
As in plaine termes (yet cunningly) he crau'd it,
Loue alwayes makes thoſe eloquent that haue it,
Shee,with a kind of granting,put him by it,
And euer as he thought himſelfe moſt nigh it,
Lihe to the tree of Tantalus ſhe fled,
And ſeeming lauiſh,ſau'd her maidenhead,
Ne're king more ſought to keepe his diademe,
Than Hero this ineſtimable gemme.
Aboue our life wee loue a ſtedfaſt friend,
Yet when a token of great worth wee ſend,
We : often kiſſe it,often looke thereon,
And ſtiy the meſſenger that would bee gone,
No maruell then, though Hero would not yeeld
ſone to Part from tharſie deerely held.

Iewels beene loſt are found againe,this neuer,
Tis loſt but once,and once loſt,loſt for euer.
Now had the morne eſpi'd her louers ſteeds,
Whereat ſhe ſtarts,puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that he ſtaid ſo long,
All headlong throwes her ſelfe the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be miſt,
Imbraſt her ſodainely,tooke leaue and kiſt :
Long was he taking leaue,and loath to goe,
And kiſt againe as louers vſe to doe :
Sad Hero wroong him by the hand and wept,
Saying,let your vowes and promiſes be kept.
Then ſtanding at the dore,ſhe turnd about,
As loath to ſee Leander going out.
And now the ſunne that through th'orizon peepes,
As pittying theſe louers,downward creepes.
So that in ſilence of the clowdie night,
Though it was morning,did he take his flight.
But what the ſecret truſty night conceal'd,
Leanders amorous habit ſoone reueal'd,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonnet crownd,
About his armes the purple riband wound,
Wherewith ſhe wreath'd her largely ſpreading heare,
Nor could the youth abſtaine,but hee muſt weare,
The ſacred ring wherewith ſhe was endow'd,
When firſt religious chaſtity ſhe vow'd,
Which made his loue through Seſtos to be knowne,

And thence vnto Abydus ſooner blowne,
Than he could ſaile,for incorporeall Fame,
Whoſe waight conſiſtsin nothing but hername
Is ſwifter than the wind,whoſe tardie plumes,
Are rceking water,an'd dull earthly iumes.
hom when he came,he ſeem'd not to be there
But like exiled aire thruſt from his ſphere,
Set in a forren place, and ſtraight from thence,
Alcidles like by mig'ty violence,
He would hane chac'd away the ſwelling main
That him from her vniuſtly did detaine,
Like as the Sunne in a Diameter
Fires and inflames obiects remooued farre,
And heareth kindly ſhining I t'rally,
So beauty ſweetly quickens when it s me,
But being ſeparated and remooued,
Burnes where it cheriſht,murders where it loued,
Therefore,euen as an Index to a booke,
So to his mind was young Leanders looke,
O none haue power but Gods their loue to hide,
Affecti on by the count'nance is deſcride,
The light of hidden fire it ſelfe diſcouers,
And loue that is conceal'd,betrayes poore louers,
His ſecret flame apparantly was ſeene,
LLeanders father knew where he had beene,
ind for the ſame mildly rebukt his ſonne,
ling to quench the ſpariles new begunne.

But loue reſiſted once,growes paſsionate,
And nothing more then counſell louers hate,
For as a hote proud horſe,highly diſdaines
To haue his head controld, but breakes the raines
Spits forth the ringled bit,and with his houes
Checkes the ſubmiſsiue ground,ſo he that loues,
The more he is reſtrain'd, the worſe he fares
What is it now,but mad Leander dares ?
O Hero, Hero, hus he cride full oft,
And then he got him to a rocke aloft,
Where hauing ſpide her tower,long ſtar'd he on't,
And pra'd the narrow toiling Helleſpont
To part in twaine that he might come and go,
But ſtill the riſing billowes anſwered no,
With that he ſtript him to the yu'rie skin,
And crying, Loue I come,leapt liuely in :
Whereat the ſaphir viſag'de god grew proud,
And made his capring Triton ſound aloud,
Imagining,that Ganimed diſpleas'd,
Had left the heauens, thetefore on him he ſeaz'd,
Leander ſtriude, the waues about him wound,
And puld him to the bottome,where the ground
Was ſtrewd with pearle,and in low corrall growes,
Sweet ſinging Mermaids ſpotted with their loues,
On heapes of heany gold,and tooke great pleaſure,
To ſpurne in careleſſe ſort,the ſhipwracke treaſure.
For here the ſtately azure pallace ſtoode,

Where kingly Neptune and his traine abode.
The luſty God im braſt him, cald him loue,
And ſwore he neuer ſhould returne to loue,
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For vnder water he was almoſt dead,
He heau'd him vp,and looking on his face,
Beat downe the bold waues with his triple mace
VVhich mounted vp,intending to haue kiſt him,
And fell in drops like teares,becauſe they miſt him.
Leander being vp,beganne to ſwim,
And looking backe, ſaw Neptune follow him.
VVhereat agaſt,the poore ſoule gan to crie,
O let me viſite Hero ere I die,
The god put Helles bracelet on his arme,
And ſwore the ſea ſhould neuer doe him harme.
He clapt his plumpt cheeke s,with his treſſes plaide
And ſmiling wantonly,his loue hewraide,
He watcht his armes,and as they opende wide,
At euery ſtroke betwixt them would he ſlide,
And ſteale a kiſſe,and then run out and dance,
And as he turnd caſt many a luſtfull glance,
And threw him gawdy toyes to pleaſe his eye,
And diue into the water, and there prie
Vpon his breaſt,his thighes,and euery lim,
And vp againe,and cloſe beſide him ſwim.
And talke of loue, Leander made reply,
Faire deeeiro, am no woman l.

Thereat ſmilde Neptune,and then told a tale,
How that a ſhepheard ſitting in a vale,
Plaide with a boy,ſo faire and kind,
As for his loue,both earth and heauen pin'd,
That of the cooling riuer durſt not drinke,
Leſt water-Nymphes ſhould pul him from the brink
And when he ſported in the fragrant lawnes,
Gotcsſooted Satyrs,and vp ſtarting Fawnes
VVould ſteale him the nce Ere half this tale was done.
Aye me,Leander cride,th'enamored ſunne,
That now ſhould ſhine on Thetis glaſsie bower,
Deſcends vpon my radiant Heroes tower.
O that theſe tardie armes of mine were wings,
And as he ſpake, vpon the waues hee ſprings,
Neptune was angry rhat hee gaue no eare,
And in his heart reuenging malice bare:
He flung at him his mace,but as it went,
He cal'd it in,for loue made him repent,
The mace returning backe,his owne hand hit
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this freſh bleeding wound Leander viewd
His colour went and came,as if he rewd
The griefe which Neptune felt. In gentle breſts,
Relenting thoughts,remor'e and pitty reſts.
And who haue hard hearts,and obdurate minds,
But vicious,hare,braind,and illit'rat hindes ?
ſ

Thereon concluded that he was beloued.
(Loue is too full of faith,too credulous,)
With folly and falſe hope deluding vs.
herefore Leanders fancy to ſurprize,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
Tis wiſdom to giue much,a gift preuailes,
When deepe perſw ading oratorie failes.
By this, Leander being neere the land,
Caſt downe his weery feet,and felt the ſand,
Breath leſſe albeit he were,he reſted not,
Till to the ſolitarie tower he got :
And knockt,and cald,at which celeſtiall noiſe,
The lo nging heatt of Hero much more ioyes,
Then Nymphs & ſhepheards,whe the timbrel rings
Or crooked Dolphin when the Sailer ſings,
She ſtaide not for her robes,but ſtraight aroſe,
And drunhe with gladneſſe, to the dore ſhe goes,
Where ſeeing a naked man,ſhe ſcriecht for feare
Such ſights as this to tender maids are rare,
Andran into the darke her ſelfe to hide,
Rich iewels in the darke are ſooneſt ſpide.
Vhto her was he led or rather draw ne,
By thoſe white lims which ſparhled through the lawn
The neerer that he came,the more ſhe fled,
And ſeeking refuge,ſlipt into her bed,
Whereon Leander ſitting, thus began,
aaora ar rere ainr aind r an

If not for loue,yer loue for pitty ſake,
Me in thy bed and maiden boſome take,
At leaſt vouchſafe theſe armes ſome litt leroome,
Who hoping to imbrace thee,cheerely ſwome.
This head waz beat with many a churliſh billow
And therefore let it reſt vpon thy pillow.
Here with affrighted Hero ſhrunke away,
And in her uike watme place Leander lay,
VVhoſe liuely heat like fire from heauen fet,
VVould animate groſſe clay,and higher ſet
The drooping thoughts of bafe declining ſonles,
Then drerie Mars catowſing Nectar boules.
His hands he caſt vpon her like a ſnare,
Shee ouercome with ſhame and ſallow feare,
Like chaſt Diana when Actcon ſpide her,
Being ſodainely betraide,diu'd down to hide her,
And as her ſiluer body downeward went,
VVith both her hands ſhe made the bed a tent,
And in her owne mind thought her ſelfe ſecure,
Orecaſt with dim and darkefon couerture,
And now ſhe lets him whiſpet in her eare,
Flatter,intreat,promiſe,proteſt and ſweare,
Yet euer after as he greedily aſſaide
To touch thoſe daintie,ſhee the Harpey playde,
And euery lim did as a Souldier ſtout,
Defend the fort,and keepe the foe men out.
For though the riſing yu tie mount he ſcald,

Which is with azure circling liues empal'd,
Much like a globe (a globe may I tearme this,
By which loue ſailes to regions full of blis?)
Yet there with Syſipous he toilde in vaine,
Till gentle parlie did the truce obtaine.
She trembling ſtroue,this ſtrife of here (like that
Which made the world)another world begat,
Of vnknowne ioy. Treaſon was in ber thought,
And cunningly to yeeld her ſelfe ſhe ſought.
Seeming not woon,yet woon ſhee was at length,
In ſuch warres women vſe but halfe their ſtrength.
Leander now like T heban Hercules,
Entred the orchard of Theſperides.
Whoſe fruit none righ tly can deſcribe but he
That puls or ſhakes it from the golden tree :
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breſt,
Breathleſſe,ſpoke ſome thing,and ſigh'd out the reſt,
Which ſo preuai'd,as he with ſmall adoe,
Inclos'd her in his armes,and kiſt her to,
And euery kiſſe to her was as a charme,
And to Leander as a freſh alarme,
So that the truce was broke,and ſhe alat,
Poore ſilly maiden) at his merey was.
Loue is not full of pitty(as men ſay)
But deafe and cruell where he meanes to pray.
Euen as a bird,which in our hands we wring,
rgetb, antor futers wiro her wing. w

And now ſhe wiſht this night were neuer done
And ſigh'd to thinke vpon th' approching ſunne,
For much it grieu'd her that the bright day-light
Should know the pleaſure of this bleſſed night.
And then like Mars and Ericint diſplayed,
Both in each others armes chaind as they layd.
Againe,ſhe knew not how to frame her looke,
Or ſpeake to him,who in a moment tooke
That which ſo long fo charily ſhe kept,
And faine by ſtealth away ſhe would haue crept,
And to ſome corner ſecretly haue gone,
Leauing Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were iwhipping out,
He on the ſuddaine cling'd her ſo about,
That Meremaid-like vnto the floore ſhe ſlid,
One halfe appear'd,the other halfe was hid.
Thus neere the bed,ſhe bluſhing ſtood vpright,
And from her countenance hehold yee might,
A kind of twi-light breake,which through the heare,
As from an orient cloud,glymſe here and there.
And round about the chamber this falſe morne,
Brought forth the day before the day was borne.
So Heros ruddie cheeke, Hero betraid,
And her all naked to his ſight diſplaide.
VVhence his admiring eyes more pleaſure fooke,
Than Dis, on hes pes of gold fixing his looke
By this Apolos gblden hirpe began,

To ſound forth muſicke to the Ocean,
Which watchſull Heſperus no ſooner heard,
But he the day bright bearing Car prepar'd,
And ran before,as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beames mockt ongly night,
Till ſhe o recome with anguiſh,ſhame and rage,
Dang'd downe to hell her loathſome carriage: